The cryptocurrency space has two opinionated and well defined groups—believers and nonbelievers.
To date, there has been little middle ground.
However, this is quickly changing.
Indeed, financial services firms are seeing increasing demand from their customers for access to Bitcoin and other cryptocurrency-related products, and the capital markets also are confronting a broad set of crypto-related developments.
As the space continues to develop, other organizations are exploring whether to get involved, and where to begin.
Given the dynamic nature of the market, the emerging legal and regulatory climate, and the sheer volatility of crypto assets, it can be a daunting task to define the space or even understand the strategic rationale of introducing a cryptocurrency into an organization.
This is especially true for directors and executives who may not be well versed in cryptocurrencies, their limitations, or even the underlying technology—not to mention the regulatory, risk, accounting, data security, and tax considerations that arise when dealing with a new asset class or service offering.
This is a seemingly simple question, but since most people answer about what they think, hope, or want cryptocurrencies to be, it is a confusing one.
Cryptocurrencies are a digital asset that started as a medium of exchange for people to buy goods and services.
Over time, their functionality has expanded.
Cryptocurrency value can be pegged to underlying asset such as U.S.
dollar, central bank digital currencies, privacy coins (senders and receivers are anonymous), governance tokens (gives owners the right to vote in decisions regarding blockchain’s future development), utility tokens, and non-fungible tokens (distinct characteristics from all others).
This is from a developer/development side.
Of course, there are also investors and speculators who are hoping for appreciation.
It is very important you know the intent and functionality of cryptocurrency you own or are considering owning.
Cryptocurrency transactions are recorded on a shared, digital ledger called a blockchain.
This is decentralized technology, spread across many computers, that records every transaction.
Blockchain is the technology that allows for cryptocurrencies to work.
It is a decentralized and digital ledger of transactions used for cryptocurrencies and other assets/functions.
It is important to separate the technology behind cryptocurrencies from the actual cryptocurrencies.
The most popular and widely heard of cryptocurrency is Bitcoin.
As of early January 2021, the total cryptocurrency market is over $1 trillion, and Bitcoin is around $700 billion.
Believe it or not, there are over 7,800 cryptocurrencies in existence and growing.
The top five, with over 80 percent of the market value, are Bitcoin, Ethereum, XRP, Tether, and Litecoin.
(footnote 2) People saw the success of Bitcoin and tried to improve existing functionality and provide new functionality with new cryptocurrencies.
Additionally, investors and developers were certainly trying to make money.
Since cryptocurrency operates on a decentralized network that lacks a central authority, it is possible to exchange cryptocurrency without registering an identity.
Yes, since the start there have been criminal activities with cryptocurrencies.
However, the blockchain publicly records every transaction, and while names are not assigned to addresses, you can trace activity back to a crypto exchange, which knows the end user.
The estimates vary for how many transactions are for illegal activities and proponents of cryptocurrency point to illegal activity with traditional currencies.
(Source: NY Times article Jan 2020) Yes.
In 2013, the U.S.
Treasury Department’s Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FINCEN) stated that it is legal to invest in Bitcoin and use it as a form of payment as long as the seller is willing to accept it.
The Securities and Exchange Commission has designated cryptocurrency as digital currency, the Commodity Future Trading Commission as commodities, and the IRS as property.
You can purchase in any state, but certain states have imposed regulations.
As an example, New York has a policy where any business must apply for a BitLicense if it is dealing with cryptocurrency.
As adoption increases, look for regulatory and legal updates at the federal and state level.
There are a couple of methods, but the simplest and least expensive is via an online cryptocurrency exchange.
You establish an account and from there, you transfer in cash and purchase the cryptocurrency of your choice.
The exchange will allow you to buy, sell, and hold cryptocurrency.
The user experience, fees, and identification requirements all vary based on the exchange, so it is important to conduct research before you do anything.
Some of the most popular are Coinbase, Gemini, and Kraken.
Additionally, traditional online brokers are starting to offer services such as eToro and Robinhood.
Further, fintech and technology companies are starting to offer these services (Square and PayPal as two examples).
Simply put, crypto wallets are places to store digital assets more securely than just on an exchange.
 You hold your wallet via an exchange account, custody wallet, or outside of the exchange.
You can establish an online or “hot” wallet that is internet connected—to your desktop, table or mobile phone.
There is also the option to store on a device that is not connected to the internet (“cold” wallet).
Cold wallets are the most secure way to store your cryptocurrency, but they are meant for longer-term holdings as they are not connected to the internet.
With cold storage, you must remember your private keys (identifier number for your cryptocurrency).
Believe it or not, there are Bitcoin ATMs.
You insert cash and bitcoins are transferred to your secure, digital wallet.
There are also peer-to-peer (PTP) exchanges.
Users post what they are hoping to buy or sell and then choose their trading partner(s).
These products are just starting to come to the marketplace.
The design of these products is to gain exposure to cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and Ethereum without having to directly purchase.
Beyond the fees for doing this, these products currently trade at a very high premium to the underlying cryptocurrency prices.
The premium could continue to persist in the future, but investors need to consider the price they are pricing for the exposure.
Depending on who you ask, you would most likely get a different answer.
Some investors believe it will be a store of value over time and a hedge against traditional fiat money.
Some people just want to speculate and make a quick buck (coin).
Some do want to be part of the ecosystem and use it as an alternative to traditional currency—not as an investment per se but a means of transacting.
In 2014, the IRS issued a notice that virtual and digital currency is treated as property for federal income tax purposes.
When you sell cryptocurrency for capital gain or capital loss, this will be recognized.
Starting in 2019, the IRS specifically asks about cryptocurrency on the first page of Schedule 1.
The expectation is for this to continue going forward and for CPAs to ask this question in their annual tax binder.
Even if the exchange you purchased does not provide tax reporting forms, you need to record your transactions.
Additionally, the IRS does provide a handy FAQ.
America’s gross domestic product plummeted and the zeitgeist changed from a posture of consumerative acquisition to retentive stockpiling.
The stoppage of income led to a stoppage in spending, which in turn brought small businesses to their knees and banks to mounting defaults.
While this book has been extensive in its coverage of disparate areas of blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies, it still only scratches the surface.
My hope is that the knowledge in this book serves as a solid foundation of this new industry with which you can begin doing substantive research into the areas that draw your attention.
As inflation continues to rise and the dollars we work so hard for become less and less valuable, it’s imperative that you find an appreciating store of value to protect the money you hold.
The most recent inflation numbers in the United States record a value of 7% per year, which means that the dollar in your pocket loses 7% of its already dwindling buying power each year that passes.
It’s bad enough that many of us are entirely dependent on our jobs for financial stability and must trade our finite number of hours for an arbitrary amount of money per hour.
Add a payment that is quickly losing its buying power and that makes for a dire situation indeed.
If you want to play it safe and put your money in an investment vehicle that can’t possibly be devalued, do more research into Bitcoin and decide if it makes sense for you to invest your money into it.
It deserves repeating that you can buy tiny fractions of a bitcoin and don’t need $40,000 on hand to buy a full coin, like you would need when purchasing stocks.
You can start with just $10, and while this will only buy you a tiny fraction of a Bitcoin, it will likely be better than leaving those $10 in your bank account to depreciate by 7% or more per year.
Those with a greater appetite for risk should consider investing in altcoins, NFTs, and micro caps, all of which we discussed at length in earlier chapters.
While these are risky investments and could very well send your money to zero, if you know what you’re doing you have a good chance of making returns that are unheard of in the stock market.
Cryptocurrency presents so many opportunities to make a life-changing amount of money.
In all my years of investing I’ve never seen asset classes that have so easily made those with the right combination of luck and timing millionaires.
Indeed, it’s almost frustrating to look back six months at different projects that have had meteoric rises and calculate how much you could have made had you invested before the pump.
There are hundreds of these same scenarios, where many have been invested at the right time and have made millions.
The good news, however, is that there will be hundreds more of these scenarios.
How do you find out about them? Get involved and do your research.
Follow the blockchain and cryptocurrency experts I listed in Chapter 6.
Read articles, listen to podcasts, and watch YouTube videos.
There has never been an easier time in history to learn from industry experts and better your understanding of complex areas.
Rise up and take responsibility for your financial future.
The hard work you do now can pay off in years or even months when you have more money than you know what to do with.
Although the cryptocurrency environment as a whole is still fraught with risk, it’s safe to say that it’s not going anywhere.
It’s currently a $2 trillion dollar industry, even after a 30% loss across the board, and it will get bigger.
An industry that big doesn’t simply disappear.
Crypto is here to stay and those with long-term investing goals will do well to accumulate now and hold for years, even decades.
Do your due diligence and free your money from the corrosive effects of inflation and who knows, you might even acquire financial independence along the way.
Best of luck, my friends.
The onset of the Coronavirus Pandemic in early 2020 catalyzed a chain reaction of events that have dramatically changed the financial landscape.
Millions of Americans and employees worldwide found themselves unable to work as businesses shuttered to combat the spread of the novel virus.
America’s gross domestic product plummeted and the zeitgeist changed from a posture of consumerative acquisition to retentive stockpiling.
The stoppage of income led to a stoppage in spending, which in turn brought small businesses to their knees and banks to mounting defaults.
Faced with this rising crisis, the American government turned to the Federal Reserve and began issuing stimulus payments to each and every American citizen to buoy the economy.
These payments, of course, did not come from the sale of financial assets or restructuring of the federal budget, but instead out of thin air.
The size and scope of this money printing is hard to comprehend.
In January of 2020, the Federal Reserve held roughly $4 trillion on its balance sheet.
A year later, in January of 2021, this amount had increased to $6.7 trillion through three rounds of stimulus checks and other forms of quantitative easing.
All told, the total amount of dollars ever created increased by 40% in a single year.
In January of 2022, the situation was even worse.
The graph below shows the M1 money supply in the United States, which is composed of currency, demand deposits, and other liquid deposits that can be moved quickly.
Dollars printed by the Federal Reserve are directly represented in the M1 money supply.
As you can see, the M1 money supply has increased to almost $21 trillion in the last year, far above the rate of increase in 2020 and unprecedented in American history.
The result? Roughly 80% of United States dollars in existence today were created in the last two years, at the time of this writing.
Money printing such as this, or any significant increase in a country’s money supply, can lead to a devaluation of the country’s currency.
As the money supply increases, if the rate of production does not also increase, there are more dollars in circulation to buy the same number of goods and services, which causes prices to rise.
Subsequently, a single dollar no longer buys as much as it previously did, and devaluation begins.
In the case of the Coronavirus Pandemic, the amount of dollars in the United States increased dramatically, but the rate of production dropped severely, making this a much more potent recipe for inflation and devaluation than if the rate of production had stayed the same.
Devaluation often goes hand-in-hand with inflation, worsening the effects of higher prices and less potent dollars.
As of November 2021, the United States rate of inflation was calculated to be 6.8% for the twelve month period ending in November 2021.
Compared with previous years, 6.8% is severe, as shown in the chart below: What’s more concerning is that 6.8% may be an artificially low measurement.
The inflation rate is found through calculating the change in the Consumer Price Index over a given period of time.
The Consumer Price Index is a measurement of the average weighted cost of an arbitrary basket of goods at a specific point in time, and the inflation rate is found by measuring the cost for two identical baskets of goods at two different times.
While this is meant to give a general overview of what the inflation rate is across all goods and services, the resulting inflation rate can be artificially set by the choice of goods and services loaded into the arbitrary Consumer Price Index basket.
If the government wants to hide the severity of the inflation rate, they can simply choose items that have inflated little and put those in the basket, resulting in a lower inflation rate than is experienced day to day.
If we take an inflation rate of 6.8% and assume that it stays fixed, which it likely won’t, this means that traditional methods of saving and “storing money in the mattress” are no longer viable.
Money that sits in a bank account during a period of inflation will devalue more and more as inflation rises.
In order to maintain the value of your hard-earned money, you’d have to invest in an asset that guarantees at least 7% interest or appreciation per year, which will never be found through traditional savings accounts, accounts, bonds, or Treasury bills.
This inflationary environment and systematic devaluation of the American dollar spurred the world to look for a store of value that wouldn’t be devalued or manipulated.
Thus began the boom in cryptocurrencies, primarily led by Bitcoin, which many refer to as digital gold.
Cryptocurrencies, and especially Bitcoin, have provided a safe haven for those who are weary of seeing their hard-earned wages consistently eroded.
These digital assets are decentralized, meaning there is no central, governing entity in control of the currency that can manipulate its value or supply.
In fact, in the case of many cryptocurrencies the supply is immutable, which means the currency can never be devalued like has been done to countless fiat currencies.
History has not been kind to countries who engage in excessive money printing.
Perhaps the most famous case of this was seen during the Weimar Republic of Germany, after World War I.
In the wake of the war Germany faced massive debt repayments as the result of deciding to finance the war entirely with debt, rather than with instating an income tax, as France had done.
To make matters worse, the German emperor debased their own currency by taking it off the Gold Standard, which allowed German marks to be exchanged for gold and kept the value of the mark fixed.
The United States government did the same thing during the presidency of Richard Nixon in 1971, which has led to an 80% reduction in the buying power of one dollar in 2022.
The graph below shows how $1 in 1971 now only purchases roughly $0.15 of goods and services: Germany planned to pay back its debt by winning the war and imposing reparations on those it had defeated.
This, of course, didn’t go to plan, starting with Germany losing the war.
To pay back the massive debt of $33 billion dollars, the Weimar Republic began to print money without any economic resources to back it.
The devaluation of the German mark began, and in 1919 it took 48 paper marks to match the purchasing power of one dollar.
As the value of the German mark continued to fall, the Weimar Republic began to buy foreign currencies in order to make reparations payments, but this only exacerbated the devaluation of the mark and rising inflation crisis.
By the end of 1922, the German mark had fallen to 7,400 marks per one American dollar, and the cost of living in the Weimar Republic increased 17 fold.
At the peak of the crisis in late 1923, one US dollar was worth 4,210,500,000,000 German marks.
Images from the Republic during the peak of the crisis show children toting around wheelbarrows full of German marks, burning them, making kites and hats, and building playhouses out of the bricks of devalued currency.
While I like to believe that modern policy makers and fiscal experts have learned lessons from the likes of the Weimar Republic, inflationary periods still hurt the common man, even if it’s not as severe as a period of hyperinflation.
Many of us are already in servitude to our paychecks, trading our finite time for an arbitrary assignment of money per hour.
The problems of a work culture that is still stuck in the Industrial Revolution get exponentially worse when your precious paycheck has less and less buying power, which is why it’s imperative that you find another store of value to combat inflation’s corrosion.
When considering the question of where to invest your money during an inflationary period, many will point you to the stock market.
Index funds are the typical choice if you don’t know what you’re doing, which bundle a broad swath of the stock market into a single investment vehicle.
According to Investopedia, the S&P 500 had an annualized return of 10.5% percent from its inception in 1957 to 2021, and any index fund of the S&P 500 would have had similar returns.
While this is a handsome return and would protect you from mild inflation with room to spare, there are those of us who want more.
Take Bitcoin, for example.
Since 2017, the digital asset has commanded an average of 97% annualized returns, with some years far surpassing that.
CNBC wrote an article detailing how much money an investor would have had they put $1000 in Bitcoin one, five, and ten years ago.
$1,000 in 2016 would have turned into $58,900 in July of 2021, representing a growth of 5,085%.
While these results are not guaranteed across other cryptocurrencies, they’re also not impossible to replicate and surpass.
However, the digital asset market is still a burgeoning environment with inherent volatility and risk.
Although 2021 was a miraculous year for many retail investors in the crypto markets, just as many investors, and likely more, have lost their entire investments by not knowing what they’re doing.
Even the most seasoned investors in digital assets can make mistakes, which is why the general sentiment around investing in cryptocurrencies is, “Only invest what you’re fine with losing.” In other words, only invest an amount of money that wouldn’t ruin your life should you lose all of it.
The volatility and risk of the cryptocurrency markets make this a daunting space to venture into, and with good reason.
That, however, is my reason for writing this book.
There are proven ways to make money through investing in cryptocurrencies, and it’s not as difficult or risky as modern media outlets make it out to be.
The first step in getting comfortable with this space is to become knowledgeable, which is why we’ll spend an entire chapter on the concept of blockchains, as this technology is the backbone of the vast majority of crypto technologies.
If you’re tired of seeing your paycheck’s buying power continually eroded by the slow encroach of inflation, this book is for you.
If you want to learn more about cryptocurrencies, digital assets, and blockchains, this book will guide you through the basics of this rapidly evolving space.
Take control of your money and secure it in appreciating assets that can’t be devalued by excessive money printing and other quantitative easings.
The digital asset industry is still new and those investing in the space now are still early to the party.
The fact that large financial institutions have started investing in cryptocurrencies lends a greater stability to the space as a whole, and gives me confidence that this isn’t just a repeat of the dotcom bubble in the late 90s and early 2000s.
The time to start learning about cryptocurrencies, digital assets, NFTs, blockchain technology, and the metaverse is now.
These will be the investments that future generations wish they could have entered into at the ground floor, but you have the opportunity to learn and secure your financial future today.
Besides a deep dive into blockchain technology, this book also explains the following: Bitcoin, and what makes Bitcoin digital gold Ethereum, and its past and future The top altcoins in the space today, like Solana, Polkadot, Avalanche, and many more NFTs, and how to make your own How to look at a cryptocurrency coin or token and determine if it’s worth investing in Staking, and how to make passive income with cryptocurrency investments Bitcoin mining The Metaverse, and how to invest in our digital future After reading this book, you’ll have the knowledge needed to invest with confidence in digital assets and keep your money safe from rising inflation.
This knowledge will keep you abreast of one of the greatest wealth transfers in all of human history, and skilled investors will have the chance to become financially independent through this nascent space.
Ready to get started? Read on, my friends.
Blockchain.
You hear the word all the time, but still might not know what it means.
Financial pundits and millionaires in their twenties explain that they’re the building blocks of all digital currencies’ infrastructures, but that still doesn’t lend the lightbulb moment of understanding.
And that’s okay! A comprehensive understanding of blockchain technology will be required before we can attempt to grasp other subjects in the field, and that’s why this chapter will be dedicated to the discussion of just that – the blockchain.
What is a Blockchain? A blockchain is a database distributed among nodes on a computer network.
Still gibberish? In English, a blockchain is a storehouse for information that’s distributed across many smaller storehouses.
Those storehouses are actually databases, which are simple software programs for holding and organizing data.
Since a database is digital, a blockchain also stores information in digital format.
Blockchains form the backbone of any cryptocurrency system and their primary function is to maintain a decentralized and secure record of transactions.
One major advantage of a blockchain is that it guarantees the security and fidelity of data without the need for a third party.
I’ll explain how in a moment.
The data structure of a blockchain is what differentiates it from a normal database.
A blockchain groups information into blocks, which are just mini databases that record a transaction or encounter.
Take for example, a typical credit card transaction.
There’s a buyer, a seller, and good or service that was purchased.
All of this information describes the transaction, along with date information.
If this transaction was enacted through a system that was built on a blockchain, that transaction would be recorded in a block.
The next transaction would be recorded in the next block, and so on.
Along with storing data, blocks also store a hash value, which is a unique identifier for the block which represents all of the block’s contents.
Hashes are always unique, like fingerprints, and since the hash is based on the content of the block, if the content inside the block changes, the hash will also change.
This makes blocks tamper-proof, since there is no way to change the content inside a block without also changing the hash.
This is significant because each block also stores the hash of the block that came before it in the chain.
The very first block in the chain notes that it is the start, because there is no block before it.
The next block created would note the hash of the block behind it, which would be the first block, and store it.
Then the next – or third – block in our chain would note the hash of the second block, and so on and so forth.
Take, for example, the chain described above with three blocks.
If a malevolent actor went in and modified the middle block, this would change the hash of the block, which would then cause the third block to notice that the hash it stored of the previous block no longer matches that block’s hash.
If there were ten thousand more blocks after the third block, each would be able to validate the same finding, and the change would be overwritten since it didn’t pass validation of every other block in the blockchain.
While a blockchain structures data into blocks, a normal database does so into tables.
When a block is filled with data, it becomes part of a larger timeline, meaning that it is impossible to alter a single piece of data without overhauling the entire blockchain.
Thus, greater security is inherent in the design of a blockchain over that of a traditional database.
Blockchains are also decentralized, which means that no single, governing entity controls the state or validation of the blockchain.
How is a Blockchain Decentralized? To understand how blockchain decentralization works, we need an example.
Suppose that you own a company with 10,000 computers that are used to maintain a database containing the account information of your clients.
To house all of these units, you put them in a warehouse building.
All of them are under the same roof and you have complete control over each of those computers as well as the data inside.
The problem with this is that there are some points of failure.
What if the power goes out? What if the connection to the internet is lost? What if the entire place goes up in flames? What if a malicious individual got in and deleted everything? In any of those cases, all the data is corrupted or lost.
Here, a blockchain allows for better data protection in a number of ways.
It spreads out the database among many network nodes at different locations.
This accomplishes two things.
For one, How is a Blockchain Decentralized? To understand how blockchain decentralization works, we need an example.
Suppose that you own a company with 10,000 computers that are used to maintain a database containing the account information of your clients.
To house all of these units, you put them in a warehouse building.
All of them are under the same roof and you have complete control over each of those computers as well as the data inside.
The problem with this is that there are some points of failure.
What if the power goes out? What if the connection to the internet is lost? What if the entire place goes up in flames? What if a malicious individual got in and deleted everything? In any of those cases, all the data is corrupted or lost.
Here, a blockchain allows for better data protection in a number of ways.
It spreads out the database among many network nodes at different locations.
This accomplishes two things.
For one, Achieving censorship would be nigh impossible if information distribution and storage is decentralized.
When all the data comes from a single source, it is easy to alter and censor certain pieces of it.
However, when the database is decentralized, there is no central authority that controls the data flow.
Think of it like trying to block a leak.
If there is only one hole, it’s easy.
You cannot say the same if there are a hundred holes.
For instance, social media platforms often regulate the kind of content you can upload.
They will delete offensive, provocative, or inappropriate content.
However, when you communicate on a decentralized platform, everybody can interact with no moderation.
Open Development Open-source developments are important for a number of reasons.
The most prominent one is the fact that everybody can see exactly how the program or system is being developed.
Decentralized networks typically sport open development environments.
With an open development environment, the network is able to offer superior products, tools, and services since the verification of edits to a blockchain is inherent in the architecture of the blockchain.
Open-source software is basically an open book.
Anyone can look at the codes behind the application and use or modify it as they see fit.
That ensures nothing shady is built into the code that could restrict user access and establish a single point of control.
An open development, decentralized blockchain makes these instance much easier to find.
Most major open-source software has its codes on GitHub, which is a code repository tool designed for open-source development.
What is a Digital Currency? Before we can understand what exactly qualifies as a digital currency, we need to know what the money we have in our pocket is called.
Currencies issued by the government are called fiat currencies.
These are physical representations such as coins and paper money that hold a certain value, which you can trade for goods and services.
When fiat currencies are stored digitally, they become digital currency.
This is an early form of digital cash, which can be transferred between bank accounts and is in use today in the form of credit or debit cards, wire transfers, online payments, etc.
Cryptocurrencies are categorized as digital currencies as well.
Bitcoin is the first-ever cryptocurrency and was privately developed as a way to exchange money on the internet independent of major financial institutions.
Since its debut in 2009, Bitcoin received a lukewarm reception.
Some investors believe it is a store of value whereas others remain skeptical to this day.
What is indisputable is the fact that there are now thousands of cryptocurrencies with different uses in the digital economy as well as that in the real world.
Governments across the globe are also considering creating their own digital currency.
Although fiat currency stored in digital form is technically a digital currency, it does not really equate to cryptocurrency.
The reason is that you can convert the digital currency in your bank account into cold, hard cash when you make a withdrawal.
You can use fiat currencies stored digitally to make purchases via electronic payments using a card or online payment methods.
Money in its current form is distributed by major financial institutions such as a central bank.
This is a centralized process where one institution produces the notes and assigns a system of serial numbers to them to make them unique.
The partners of the institution would then inject the cash into the economy through various means.
True digital currencies work differently.
They utilize a network of computing nodes to process transactions.
Then, cryptography would be used to anonymize the user and the details of the transaction.
All activities on the network would be recorded on an electronic ledger and every node, as in every computer, on the network would have a copy.
An electronic ledger functions similarly to a traditional public ledger.
It is a record-keeping system.
It records the user’s identities, in this case as pseudonyms, their balances, and transactions.
Think about sending your friend some cash.
If you send $100 to them, a couple of things happen.
That $100 would be deducted from your account, and its balance would be updated to reflect that, then your friend would receive $100 in their account, and its balance would also be updated.
At the same time, the accounting system ensures that your account actually has enough balance to make that transfer.
One thing that makes digital currencies so favorable is the fact that they can be transferred to another user directly without any intermediaries, whichWhat are Coins and Tokens? In the context of cryptocurrency, a coin is basically a representation of a currency within a blockchain.
Coins do not really serve any utility functions other than to be a digital item to be traded, with a value varying depending on the current market conditions.
Coins can also be exchanged for tokens on another blockchain network through private transfers or a cryptocurrency exchange.
We’ll get to tokens in a moment.
Many startup cryptocurrency companies conduct their fundraiser operations via an Initial Coin Offering before they establish their own blockchain.
Most ICOs are usually performed on the Ethereum network and users can pledge their coins (in this case, Ether) in exchange for tokens.
This is similar to how an Initial Public Offering is conducted, when a previously private company gets listed on a public stock exchange.
These tokens have utilities, which vary depending on what the startup wants you to do with them.
Since crypto tokens require a blockchain network and making one is an expensive process, most startups resort to using Ethereum’s blockchain network for the job.
Although most ICOs accept Bitcoin and Ether, some also allow you to pledge other cryptocurrencies as payment.
What exactly are crypto tokens, then? While coins represent a unit of currency, tokens represent tradable and fungible assets or utilities for that specific blockchain network.
While tokens are often distributed to ICOs funders, they can also be used for other purposes.
Tokens are created, distributed, and traded through ICOs.
What is the Difference? Now, things might get muddy here and a lot of people cannot really tell the difference between cryptocurrency, crypto coins, and crypto tokens.
But this might clear things up for you.
A cryptocurrency is basically an umbrella term that covers both tokens and coins.
For instance, Bitcoin is a cryptocurrency and it has both virtual tokens and coins that you can trade, or with which you can make purchases.
So, what is the difference between tokens and coins? Coins are strictly used to make purchases.
They work like a legal tender, basically money.
Tokens, on the other hand, are a denomination of a cryptocurrency.
They are tradable assets or utilities that you can use to either trade for other tokens or coins.
Alternatively, you can hold onto it to access various benefits offered by the underlying blockchain network.
These benefits are decided by the company offering the tokens through their ICO, and you can find the details in their “whitepaper”, which is essentially their sales pitch.
One way to look at crypto tokens is to compare them to stocks in a company.
While you can sell stocks to make money and then spend that money the same way with fiat currencies, you also reap benefits from the stock in your portfolio – namely, dividends.
This is the main difference between tokens and coins.
Tokens can represent your stake in the company you helped fund through their ICOs and they have far more utility than coins.
Coins are just used to make purchases.
Why is Blockchain Technology Important and Where Will It Take Us? While blockchain technology is frequently associated with cryptocurrencies, the technology itself has far more uses than facilitating the transfer of wealth through a decentralized network.
Both the technology and cryptocurrencies are often discussed together and some might think that blockchains would not exist without cryptocurrency, but the opposite is actually true.
Cryptocurrencies would not be as popular or widely used as they are today without the underlying blockchain technology.
There are many benefits that the blockchain technology gives us, including efficiency, affordability, security, transparency, immutability, and digital freedom, as we have discussed so far.
That is all fine and dandy, but what is stopping it from widespread adoption if it is so great? Blockchain Maturity Problem The blockchain technology is relatively new, which is perhaps the biggest reason why it has not received widespread adoption.
Given that switching to blockchain networks can be costly and risky if you already have a functioning business model, people are a bit anxious to become the early adopter.
There have been a few high-profile players who declared that they would give blockchain a chance, but people are still reluctant.
Moreover, this technology may not be the solution for every single industry out there.
While the financial sector has much to benefit from this technology, the list of benefits is quite short for other sectors such as education.
Blockchain technology is disruptive.
Its implementation and management will  like the dollar with the decentralized settlement assurance of the public blockchains.
In short, they allow you to move and settle arbitrary amounts of fiat currency anywhere over the Internet with strong fidelity and few of the encumbrances of the traditional banking system.
A section of economists hold these stablecoins in high regard because they believe stablecoins can result in a cost-effective, safe, and more competitive payment gateway that works in real time.
Stablecoins can also connect the underbanked or unbanked sections of society through their digital reach.
How Are Governments Reacting to This Disruption? Governments all around the world have varied opinions about the rise of stablecoins.
Some of them want to project them as nothing but the next big scam, while others are in the process of figuring how to integrate them into the wider economy.
The pros and cons of stablecoins can be debated to great extents, but their growing popularity cannot be ignored anymore.
Gary Gensler, the chair of the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission, commented at a conference in August 2021 that the time had come to regulate the cryptocurrency markets.
The chair of the Federal Reserve, Jerome Powell, urgently called for regulating stablecoins.
Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen even stated that stablecoins “had the potential to support beneficial payment options”.
People of such high economic significance only comment about things that really matter.
These comments indicate that the government views stablecoins as a legitimate digital currency which is going to play an important role in the future of global finance.
The Federal Reserve governor has indicated the government's plan to explore a Central Bank Digital Currency as a response to the rising popularity and strength of stablecoins.
A CBDC is a type of fiat currency in digital form.
Since it is issued by the central bank of a country, it has the faith of the issuing country's government.
CBDCs are still undergoing developments in various parts of the world, and once done, they are expected to simplify the implementation of fiscal and monetary policy.
The government's initiative in developing CBDCs proves the fact that they are intimidated by the rapid development of stablecoins.
They might look at it as an act of countering the stablecoin, but in reality, they are acknowledging its existence and rising importance.
The Growth of the Terra Ecosystem and Luna New stablecoins are coming into existence every other day, and Terra is one which has gained popularity quite quickly.
Terra is a blockchain payment platform for algorithmic stablecoins.
It helps the users to save, spend, trade, or exchange Terra stablecoins instantly on its blockchain.
The main purpose of the Terra protocol is to track the price of any fiat currency such as euros or US dollars.
The network has two main cryptocurrency tokens, Terra and Luna.
Let's briefly discuss their features: Terra: This is the token that tracks the prices of individual currencies.
Each token tracking a particular currency is named after that currency.
For instance, the Terra token that tracks the Special Drawing Rights issued by the IMF is called TerraSDR and the one that tracks dollars is called TerraUSD.
Luna: Luna absorbs the price volatility of Terra, acting as the staking token.
It is used for governance and mining.
Luna's worth is linked to Terra's usage.
DeFi 2.0 One huge crypto trend which hasn’t made its way to mainstream reporting is DeFi 2.0.
This is the second generation of decentralized finance protocols that expanded on the utility of the first generation ones which gave us things like crypto lending, yield farming and market making abilities on the blockchain.
The majority of DeFi 1.0 limitations were based around the limitations of the protocols themselves, which led to a poor user experience (making onboarding difficult for all but the most dedicated of enthusiasts).
Much of this revolves around the scaling issues that Ethereum has faced in the past 3 years, as many DeFi 1.0 projects were built on Ethereum.
DeFi 2.0 aims to do for the DeFi movement, what Coinbase did for the mainstream cryptocurrency exchange movement.
Provide a more streamlined, simple solution which is more in-lineWe see DeFi 2.0 as having far more business to business utility, with projects like OlympusDAO aiming to build a decentralized reserve currency.
The real gamechanger here is being able to scale crypto lending operations (because right now the problem is that there are simply more lenders than borrowers) as well as provide a more consistent cash flow for the ecosystem, which in turn will reduce volatility.
DeFi 2.0 will also mean more competition for Ethereum going forward, with Solana (SOL) being a frontrunner due to its low-cost, high speed, and scalable alternative to Ethereum.
These inherent features, paired with composability, have helped Solana cement itself as a choice platform of DeFi 2.0.
Other Areas of the Financial Sector Where Blockchain Can Make Its Mark The gradual rise of altcoins and blockchain technology has made it clear that this will leave a significant mark on the financial sector.
The benefits of this technology make it a perfect fit for a variety of financial operations, and that is why we have listed the following sectors which we believe will be positively affected by blockchain and crypto: Stock Market Settlements: Blockchain is set to revolutionize stock market settlements by reducing the time taken for transaction processing and improving the efficiency of trading.
It will result in lower operational costs, and smart contracts will ensure greater efficiency and security.
NASDAQ already uses blockchain for private placement, and the London Stock Exchange is exploring areas where they can apply the technology.
Asset Management: With the growth of global trade, the importance of asset management is increasing all over the world.
In fact, the asset management industry is among the fastest-growing ones in the world and is expected to grow by $150 trillion by 2025 (Jain, 2020).
Right now, the asset management network follows a centralized system that enables the users to view the assets held on a real-time basis.
However, the system is migrating to a distributed ledger system for easier access and management.
This is where blockchain technology comes into the picture.
This system will help in the faster processing of cross-border transactions and ensure error-free processing of data.
Efficient Payments: Blockchain technology can bring about serious improvements in the payment processing systems of banks or other financial institutions.
Transactions that used to take more than a week to be processed can now be instantly transferred with the help of blockchain.
Since it removes the requirements of intermediaries and money can be transferred directly between individuals, blockchain will save time and money.
Central banks of many countries are trying to implement a distributed ledger system that will improve settlement fidelity and operational risk.
Compliance Processes: Know Your Customer (KYC) is an essential element of the entire financial sector.
Every country has elaborate KYC compliance requirements, which create a huge workload for the people employed in these institutions.
Using blockchain services like KYC-chain will help the companies to streamline this process.
Bankers will be able to check the KYC details on a real-time basis, which would subsequently reduce data duplication and improve work efficiency.
The customer identification process will be automated and banks will have a digital source of ID that can be accessed on a decentralized platform by any authorized personnel.
Fraud-Free Insurance Claim Management: Blockchain is helping the insurance industry by developing a fraud-free system where claims can be sorted automatically with the help of smart contracts.
It links all concerned parties of an insurance contract, like broker, client, insurer, and insured, resulting in efficient and transparent communication.
CRYPTO CLOUD COMPUTING We briefly discussed Web 3 in a previous chapter.
In this section, I would like to tell you a bit more about our views about Web 3 and what it means for cryptocurrency investors.
It is my prediction that  the Web 3 era is the third phase of the crypto market and it can make cryptocurrencies more mainstream than ever.
I believe that it has the potential to be an event that grows the value of the entire cryptocurrency market 100x from here.
Mind you, it won't happen overnight, but I think the expected ramifications are massive.
The Rise of Web 3 Chris Dixon, a partner at Andreesen Horowitz and considered one of the smartest venture capitalists of this generation, speaks very highly about Web 3 and the future it holds for us.
In a 2021 blog post titled Why Web3 Matters, Dixon surmised: “We are now at the beginning of the web 3 era, which combines the decentralized, community-governed ethos of web 1.0 with the advanced, modern functionality of web2.0”.
Right now, we still largely exist in a web 2.0 world where giant corporations own huge chunks of the internet, and your data, Google and Facebook being the 2 which immediately spring to mind.
While these companies have been a net positive for society over the past 2 decades, we are now seeing the tide shifting against them, and a further move towards decentralization.
Web 3 facilitates a decentralized platform using blockchain technology which allows users to use the internet without their data being stored in a centralized hub or owned by a single corporation.
The biggest problem with centralized platforms is that they limit innovation after a certain point.
These platforms are completely dependent upon third-party complements like developers, creators, and businesses.
The centralized networks work in such a way that they need to keep on extracting data from their users and former partners if they wish to grow.
For the third parties involved, this indicates a switch from cooperation to competition, which makes them wary.
Chris Dixon says that these issues are making the best entrepreneurs, developers, and investors turn away from centralized platforms.
However, this is good news for Web 3, because these shortcomings of Web 1 and Web 2 are paving the way for the digital superiority of Web 3.
Web 3 has decentralized ownership and control, and tokens allow users to own a piece of the Internet.
Web 3 marks the beginning of an era when cryptocurrency companies can compete with and replace the largest technology companies in the world through the use of blockchain technology.
Here's what it looks like in practice.
A "Phase 3" crypto called Internet Computer (ICP) mimics many of the most advanced features of major cloud services like Amazon's AWS and Microsoft's Azure.
So, you can deploy websites, enterprise IT systems, and Internet services much like you would with Amazon or Microsoft's cloud hosting.
However, here's what's going to bend your mind a little bit.
With the Internet Computer, you can deploy your code directly to the Internet itself through blockchain, and there will be no intermediary like Amazon or Microsoft.
This technology that was pioneered by Bitcoin is hitting a new inflection point in its capabilities by allowing people to lend their computing resources.
If you're still having doubts about why Web 3 is the future, here are a few reasons why they matter: The decentralized system makes societies efficient by removing the third parties and reducing the cost associated with managing these intermediaries.
This will result in greater value creation for the people who are the real users and developers of data.
The new mesh of peer-to-peer communication will enable organizations to become more resilient to change.
Sharing of data between humans, enterprises, and machines will become more efficient through the privacy and security of the blockchain network.
Tokenized digital assets will enable the users to own their data and digital footprints.
Theta and Decentralized Video Streaming Theta (THETA) blockchain provides a decentralized platform and a "Phase 3" crypto which provides a solution to delivering video content across the Internet without depending on data centers.
Most Internet traffic is filled with video content, and the numbers will only continue to rise in the future because everyone is looking for real-timeupdates about what's going on.
Websites providing video-streaming content have mostly used a centralized system, which has been largely dependent upon the data centers located close to you.
Over time, this has become a problem due to connectivity issues and pressure on the system has made the quality of streaming slow and choppy.
A possible remedy to this might be a content delivery system where a group of servers will be dispersed so that the system is not burdened too much, but this can be a costly affair.
Theta is building a cryptocurrency solution to this problem by setting up a peer-to-peer network that aims at utilizing unused bandwidth.
When you are trying to view content on the Theta network, part of the data will come from the network itself and the rest will be delivered from the unused computing power of other nodes.
This is not some pie-in-the-sky dream because the co-founders of YouTube and Twitch TV are on the Theta team along with backing from Sony, Google, and Samsung.
This makes it a massive market opportunity.
The means of earning profit is not through a company like Fastly but a cryptocurrency like Theta.
In my opinion, the bottom line is that we are now starting to see Web 3 projects that are seeing real world utility, and will profitably reward investors.
We have the option of waiting until the market matures and bringing it to our readers when there is potentially less risk but also a lot less upside.
The other option is to alert our members about these developments when they're in what we believe is truly the "ground-floor" stage.
I hope readers would appreciate us doing so because we are certain this could transform the industry drastically.
CRYPTO IN VIDEO GAMES Imagine what it would be like to live in a world where people could make little or even a lot of money by simply playing video games.
Video games have been one of the most profitable industries of the last decade with stocks like Activision Blizzard (ATVI), Take-Two Interactive (TTWO), and Sea Limited (SE) providing heavy returns to investors.
Now, a combination of video games and crypto is set to light a fire under a new wave of profitable investments.
If I asked you to guess what the fastest-growing video game of 2021 was, you would probably say the latest Call of Duty or a viral sensation like Among Us.
However, the correct answer might take you by surprise because it is something you might not have heard about: Axie Infinity.
Axie Infinity’s Phenomenal Rise Axie Infinity was developed by an obscure Vietnamese developer named Sky Mavis.
Axie Infinity is about trading and battling Pokemon-like creatures called Axies, which are Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs – more on those later), and players are earning thousands of dollars just by playing.
The game has become so popular that within three years, it was valued at over $3 billion after receiving a $152 million funding round from Andreesen Horowitz (Newton, 2021).
Nobody knew that playing video games could fetch a meaningful income, which is what made Axie Infinity so well-received and led to the platform’s revenue increasing 3000-fold in 2021.
Figure 7: Axie Infinity monthly revenue in 2021 (source: AxieWorld) Previously, we highlighted Skillz (SKLZ) to members of our Capital Gains Multiplier mentorship program.
Skillz utilizes a similar play-to-earn concept with fiat currency.
Here is an example of how play-to-earn has the ability to change people’s lives for the better.
John Aaron Ramos from the Philippines is a 22-year-old who became viral when he shared pictures of his two homes, which he bought from the money earned by playing Axie Infinity.
These stories are uplifting because the players are mostly young.
Sky Mavis stated that 25% of the players of Axie Infinity never had a bank account before and Axie wallets were the first financial services they were able to access.
You can learn about more Axie Infinity stories by watching the short documentary Play-To-Earn on YouTube.
It’s well worth it if you’re interested in finding out more about the human side of this project.
From an investor standpoint, managing partners at Andreessen Horowitz feel  very hopeful about the concept that Axie Infinity has brought about.
According to them, people would love to grab an opportunity that allows them to earn money while enjoying themselves through a game.
Axie Infinity is defining a new category, and this mechanism will find itself used repeatedly in future gaming generations.
The Potential Bullish Thesis Let me tell you why I am particularly optimistic about cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology in gaming.
At the time of writing, the entire process of playing Axie Infinity is quite complicated.
Their website shows an elaborate eight-step process for players to download the game, quite different from a typical onboarding process where you tap 2 buttons and the game installs right in front of you.
Despite the complexity, the game generated more than $1 billion in revenue from in-game transactions in 2021 and became the biggest user of the Ethereum blockchain in the process.
What is even more staggering is the company did this with just 600,000 users.
Compare that to a traditional video game, Candy Crush, which generated a similar revenue in 2020, yet required 273 million users to do so.
The potential upside is massive, especially as the company just launched its own sidechain (a separate blockchain which runs parallel to Ethereum), which allows players to lower transaction fees by avoiding the main Ethereum blockchain.
It is safe to say that cryptos and blockchain make the future of gaming look quite bright.
 Many people who enter the crypto space do so in the hopes of becoming rich overnight.
However, if you want to profit long term from crypto, it is important to focus less on the day-to-day swings of Bitcoin and Ethereum and instead look at companies who are set to benefit no matter which coins are surging.
The following 3 stocks are what we call “picks and shovels” plays – because they are directly involved in facilitating cryptocurrency development or transactions, without being having direct involvement with the cryptocurrencies themselves.
This investing strategy is named after the tools used to mine for gold during the California Gold Rush.
Before prospectors could even find gold, they needed to buy a pick and a shovel so that they could mine for it.
So while there was no guarantee that the individual prospector would find gold, the companies that sold picks and shovels were earning revenue regardless.
COINBASE (COIN) Coinbase has now become synonymous with cryptocurrencies across the world.
Since Coinbase is the biggest and most trusted cryptocurrency exchange, if it were to offer crypto applications through its interface, then most Americans would consequently see these applications as trustworthy.
Brief History and Development Founded in July 2012 by former Airbnb engineer Brian Armstrong, Coinbase was first funded by Y Combinator.
The creation of Coinbase was a milestone event in the history of the cryptocurrency industry because it was the first medium that was accessible to the general public.
It was started as a medium to buy and sell Bitcoin, but today it offers more than 21 products and operates in over 100 countries.
It has more than 68 million verified users.
This is a huge number in comparison to Wells Fargo, which has 70 million clients, and Bank of America, which has 66 million clients.
How Coinbase Earned Its Position Over the years, Coinbase has played the role of a cryptocurrency kingmaker because of the phenomenal appreciation of the assets listed on the exchange.
The boom of the crypto market paired with the excellent services provided by Coinbase in terms of security, ease of use, and regulatory compliance has made it the most important figure in the crypto industry.
The company has become an authoritative figure whose stamp of approval is synonymous with authentication.
As a cryptocurrency exchange, Coinbase is of enormous significance because it has made people realize that cryptocurrency is more than a means of exchange and it has real investment value.
Coinbase has played an important role in making cryptocurrencies a part of our daily lives by introducing Coinbase cards in the USA, UK, and EU.
This Visa debit card is a crypto wallet that will enable anyone to withdraw cash from the ATM by converting crypto into the desired fiat currency.
Cryptocurrency exchanges have been notorious for being hacked due to a general lack of security.
Coinbase has always been a step ahead in this regard because they hold and insure all the assets held by them.
It stores most of the crypto assets in offline cold storage vaults so that the risk of hacking is reduced and the remaining assets are insured by Lloyd's of London.
The American users' funds in USD wallets are covered by the FDIC and insured up to $250,000.
Coinbase ensures to provide a secure trading platform to all its users, which is what has made it a commercially successful company with solid profit margins.
What Are the Possible Hurdles? Despite the many benefits of Coinbase, it is not free from its share of hurdles.
The company has been actively engaging with SEC about their lending program called Lend, which would enable the users to lend the USDC that they hold on the Coinbase platform.
The SEC refuses to approve the program by stating that Lend is classified as an "investment contract" rather than a traditional lending program, which means they believe there is an inherent risk on the part of the borrower.
However, Coinbase argues that the customers will earn interest from their participation, which will be paid regardless of the broader business objectives of the company.
These regulatory hurdles become a greater problem since other crypto companieshave been running lending programs for years without seeking approval from the SEC.
Moreover, with time Coinbase and Coinbase Pro are facing stiff competition from other crypto-asset exchanges like Bitfinex, Bitstamp, and Kraken.
Understanding the Future and the Risks Associated with Investing in Coinbase Stock Coinbase has always believed in bringing economic freedom to the users of cryptocurrencies.
They were the first website to simplify buying and selling cryptocurrencies, and they intend to do the same with NFTs.
Coinbase has announced its NFT with the aim of minting, purchasing, and trading NFTs with ease.
The company has always been a trendsetter and continued to do so when they opted for a direct listing on the NASDAQ exchange instead of an IPO.
This non-traditional yet trendy choice was apt for Coinbase since they have been the pioneers of non-traditional cryptocurrencies for the last decade.
However, there are certain inherent risks associated with the Coinbase stock, in case you are thinking of investing.
The company is heavily dependent on retail cryptocurrency trading, which comprises 82% of its total revenue.
If you add institutional trading to that, 87% of the company's total revenue will be dependent on cryptocurrency trading volumes, which have historically been very volatile (Sigalos, 2021).
What’s more is, the price of the stock moves in line with the price of Bitcoin itself, as it is the most dominant coin on the market.
Figure 8: The heavy correlation between the price of Coinbase stock and the price of Bitcoin itself (Source: Ycharts) Another factor affecting Coinbase going forward is the continued competition in the cryptocurrency exchange market.
At the time of writing, Coinbase’s market cap of $49 billion is around 2% of the total market cap of all cryptocurrencies.
Compared to another brokerage stock in Charles Schwab which is around 0.38% the market cap of total US equities.
Alternatively, you could compare it to Nasdaq, whose stock is roughly 0.07% of total US equities.
So while the cryptocurrency market will inevitably increase in size over the next decade, I would not expect Coinbase stock to keep pace with it.
Due to the recent pullback, Coinbase stock is trading relatively cheaply (6.5x 2022 sales) compared to both Nasdaq (10.8x 2022 sales) and NYSE owner Intercontinental Exchange (9.8x 2022 sales).
You can expect Coinbase to stay very unstable over the next 12 to 18 months but if you can build a position starting at a stock price below $220, then you will be setup nicely for the years to come.
SILVERGATE CAPITAL CORPORATION (SI) For generations, finance and trading have always been associated with banks.
The advent of cryptocurrencies and blockchains challenged this tradition by developing a decentralized network.
However, that does not change the fact that people still feel comparatively safer when a bank is involved.
Silvergate Capital Corporation understood this and grabbed the opportunity to become the first crypto bank in the world.
It has been a long-standing player in the financial market and has remained profitable for the past 21 years.
It provides financial infrastructure services to the participants of the digital currency space.
This relatively small crypto bank looks strong and shows ample promise for growth across multiple digital currencies including stablecoins.
In simpler terms, it is a custodian of crypto assets in addition to offering normal banking services.
It provides collateralized lending of Bitcoin, which is growing at a staggering rate of 25% per quarter.
Silvergate Exchange Network (SEN) In 2017, the company wanted to target the unexplored digital currency network, which was why they introduced the Silvergate Exchange Network (SEN).
Investors were overwhelmed due to the 24/7 trading hours of cryptocurrencies and were facing major problems in sending funds across various platforms because the trading timings varied from the normal banking hours.
Silvergate Capital Corporation addressed this problem by developing the first API-enabled real-time payment platform called SEN.
Since SEN is a two-sided network, it allows its members to conduct transactions all year round on a real-time basis.
This created a huge competitive advantage for both the users and participating networks, which attracted more people and exchanges to become a part of the cryptocurrency space.
SEN provides interest-free deposits and cross-sells additional services by capitalizing its first-mover advantage which is contributing to its rapid growth.
SEN is regarded as the core of the Silvergate Capital Corporation and is now recognized as an industry-leading payment network utilized by major crypto exchanges and institutional investors.
Opportunities in Lending and Stablecoins With the increased popularity of crypto lending, SI launched SEN Leverage, which allows users to get loans collateralized by bitcoins which are held at specified exchanges.
Their network allows them to process loans and repayments any time of the day.
They have associated themselves with Bitstamp Ltd to manage the cryptocurrency collaterals.
Although it is a relatively new part of SI, SEN has shown rapid growth by becoming 16% of their entire loan portfolio in comparison to 2% of the previous year (Analyst, 2021).
As a user, you get the benefit of flexibility and security since SEN maintains a loan-to-value ratio of 50-65% and handles volatile cryptocurrencies by enforcing various risk control measures.
Stablecoin opportunities can become beneficial for SI as Meta Platforms (formerly Facebook) has announced a partnership with them.
SI will be the exclusive manager and issuer of the Diem USD stablecoin which will be introduced by Facebook.
The Diem network will include many high-profile customers like Coinbase, Uber, Lyft, Farfetch, and Spotify.
SI's association with Diem can mean increased income and profits through transaction fees and income on reserve deposits.
The Future Prospects SEN is a particularly successful segment since it has incurred zero losses and there have been no forced liquidations to date.
The company ended the quarter with 1,305 digital currency customers, up from 928 in the third quarter of 2020 and 1,224 in the second quarter of 2021.
The transfer volume on SEN reached $219 billion in Q4 of 2021, from which Silvergate was able to generate $9.3 million in transaction fees (Silvergate Capital, 2022).
However, you must not let the recent run-up fool you since this is still at a very early stage at just a $3.5 billion market cap.
In March 2021, SI announced its association with Fidelity Digital Assets as their custody provider.
This was a huge milestone for them since this would mean that institutional investors would be able to receive USD financing using the SEN and the collateral (the Bitcoin) will be held by Fidelity Digital Assets separately in a cold storage account.
Silvergate Capital Corporation also announced partnerships with major companies like PayPal and CME Group.
It provides a moving line of credit of $100 million to Marathon Digital, which makes it a good acquisition target for big banks, such as, J.P.
Morgan.
In terms of valuation, SI shows the potential of a quintessential growth stock with a forward price-earnings ratio of 36 and a forward price-sales ratio of 14.
The leadership position and value of the SEN as a fintech platform justifies the bullish valuation.
BLOCKCHAIN EXCHANGE TRADED FUNDS (ETFS) The blockchain market has a compound annual growth rate of 50% since it is still in the early stages of development.
If you aren’t comfortable with investing in individual stocks, then Blockchain ETFs offer an efficient investment opportunity to put your money in a basket of stocks that specifically deal with blockchains.
Global X Blockchain ETF (BKCH) The Global X Blockchain ETF (BKCH) invests in companies that are set to benefit from blockchain adoption in their business operations.
They also invest in companies involved in digital asset mining, digital asset hardware, and blockchain digital asset integration.
It has a net expense ratio of 0.5%.
This fund is more mining and crypto-exchange focused and is heavily concentrated since almost 55% of the fund is invested in Coinbase, Marathon Digital, Hut 8 Mining, Riot Blockchain and Voyager Digital.
BKCH is more volatile than the other Blockchain ETFs discussed because the prices of mining stocks have a high correlation with Bitcoin prices.
Amplified Transformational Data Sharing ETF (BLOK) The fund has been around since 2018 and the majority of its holdings are in software which implies that it is more fintech related.
As of September 30, 2021, the top five companies in which this fund has invested are Hut 8 Corporation, MicroStrategy, Block (formerly known as Square), PayPal, and Marathon Digital Holdings Inc.
The fund has a net expense ratio of 0.71%.
Invesco CoinShares Global Blockchain UCITS ETF (BCHS) For our readers in the UK and EU, the best European Blockchain ETF is BCHS.
This ETF is listed in London and has over 1 billion GBP in assets under management.
The fund has a net expense ratio of 0.65% and the top 10 holdings include as mixture of both mining focused companies and FinTech companies like Hive Blockchain Technologies, Bitfarms Ltd, SBI Holdings Inc, Coinbase Global Inc, Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing, GMO Internet Inc, Monex Group Inc, Microstrategy Inc, and Kakao CorpTWO WAYS TO NOT GET EXPOSURE TO CRYPTO IN THE STOCK MARKET + ONE WAY WE’RE RECONSIDERING Crypto enthusiasts will keep telling you all the things that you should do to become a millionaire in this market.
However, there is no denying the fact that this market changes colors frequently and it is very difficult to predict anything with reasonable certainty.
Our suggestion has always been very straightforward: invest in crypto only if you feel you have the stomach for it and don't let the fear of missing out drive your decisions.
Just because the media or some tech-bloggers are hyping something does not mean you have to put all your money into it.
The crypto market is deceiving, which is why you should steer clear of these three things when you decide to become a part of this space.
PROSHARES BITCOIN STRATEGY ETF (BITO) After years of battling back and forth with the SEC to get regulatory approval, October 2021 saw the launch of the first-ever Bitcoin ETF located in the USA with the ProShares Bitcoin Strategy ETF (BITO) hitting the exchanges.
This was an achievement in itself because this was the first time in around eight years that a cryptocurrency proponent was able to secure a badge of legitimacy and authentication from the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC).
It was the fastest ETF ever to reach $1 billion assets under management (AUM) by achieving this milestone within a day of its launch.
Why this ETF isn’t what it first appears The investment policy of the ProShares ETF mentions that its main objective is to achieve capital appreciation, by investing in Bitcoin futures contracts.
This means that the fund does not directly invest in Bitcoin, nor does it track the spot price of Bitcoin.
Therefore owning BITO is not like GLD, which provides ownership of gold by proxy.
Since the fund is giving you exposure to Bitcoin futures, the current price may not reflect the spot price of Bitcoin.
The ETF puts their money in cash-settled, front-month Bitcoin futures.
Front-month means contracts whose maturity dates are the soonest.
At the end of the month, the ETF will roll their Bitcoin futures over to the next month.
They can do this by selling the contracts of the current month and again buying contracts for next month.
This process continues, and as the price of futures changes, the value of the ETF fluctuates.
This process is known as "rolling yield." Here’s where the problem lies: shorter-term traders know that the ETF has to roll over its contracts, which is why these traders drive up the price of the coming month's contracts.
As a result, BITO is forced to pay a higher price for next month’s futures.
The rolling yield method is a direct impact of the constant state of Contango of the Bitcoin futures market.
Contango is a situation where the price of futures keeps on increasing as time passes, which means the fund has to sell the expiring futures at a lower price while buying new futures at a much higher price.
BITO already accounts for one third of the Bitcoin futures market, and it will only increase as time passes and more institutional investment goes into the fund.
Because of this, the ETF will be paying an 8-10% higher price for the fresh futures, which implies that you will be getting only $0.90 worth of Bitcoin for every $1 invested in the ETF.
Moreover, future prices are based on prevailing spot prices plus the cost of carry, which may be positive or negative depending on the demand and supply forces.
This makes the prices of the ETF unstable and might create problems for the investor.
BITWISE 10 CRYPTO INDEX FUND (BITW) Bitwise Asset Management is the world's largest crypto index fund manager, which introduced the Bitwise 10 Crypto Index Fund.
It describes itself as something similar to the "S&P 500 of Crypto." This is supposed to be the first large-cap crypto index fund that exposes the investor to the so-called "exciting" world of crypto beyond Bitcoin.
It is another one of those "Bitcoin fund" type of deals and holds 84% Bitcoin and 11% Ethereum.
The remaining 5% is invested in 7 different cryptocurrencies like Litecoin, Solana, Uniswap, and Despite the high claims made by the fund, it does not perform.
I say this because the fund has an insanely high expense ratio of 2.5%.
Funds that seek to correspond to the S&P 500 Index have expense ratios that range from only 0.015% to 0.09%, which is why it is quite evident that this comparison is completely unjustified.
Another issue with these funds is that they trade only Monday to Friday.
They have not yet reached the level of dynamism of crypto trading that is taking place 24/7.
This is an issue because of the associated volatility that comes with investing in the crypto market.
Imagine there is a major drop in Bitcoin prices over the weekend.
What happens to your investment in the BITW fund? You are left exposed because you won’t be able to makes any trades until the following Monday.
GRAYSCALE BITCOIN TRUST (GBTC) GBTC rose to popularity in 2020 as it was the most liquid way to get exposure to Bitcoin in a traditional retirement account like an IRA, Roth IRA or 401(k).
We previously discussed GBTC in our book The Only Bitcoin Investing Book You’ll Ever Need.
In that book, we discouraged readers from investing due to the high management fee and the fact that the fund was trading at a significant premium in relation to its Net Asset Value (NAV).
However, since then, we have seen an interesting phenomenon with GBTC.
Figure 9: GBTC swings from a heavy premium to a significant discount to NAV (Source: YCharts) As you can see, the fund spent the majority of 2021 (and continues into 2022) trading at a large discount to NAV.
Meaning instead of paying $1.20 for $1 worth of Bitcoin like you would have done at the beginning of 2021, at the time of writing you could buy Bitcoin for 79 cents on the dollar.
We still recommend direct Bitcoin ownership over everything else, but if you do want exposure to Bitcoin in your retirement account, then GBTC is worth buying only if the fund is trading at a significant WHAT THE "F" IS AN NFT? The rise of the digital world has given a twist to the art and collectibles industry.
That's right, blockchain has penetrated the world of art and collectibles as well, and right now we’ve seen a new wave of cryptoassets come to the forefront.
Let me introduce you to the world of non-fungible tokens, or NFTs.
DECONSTRUCTING NFTS If you’re unfamiliar, then NFTs can seem confusing or downright bizarre.
Are people paying $100,000 for a JPEG image? Can’t you just copy that same image on your computer? Did Snoop Dogg really spend $17m on NFTs under the pseudonym Cozomo De Medici? The answer to that last one is, indeed, yes.
You can see Snoop Dogg’s NFT portfolio by going to https://Freemanpublications.com/snoopdoggwallet Figure 10: Cryptopunk #3100, an NFT which sold for 4,200 ETH ($7.58m) in March 2021 So what exactly IS an NFT? An NFT, or Non-Fungible Token, is a form of a digital asset that represents things like art, music, in-game objects, and videos.
They have the same underlying technology as cryptocurrencies—that is, blockchain.
NFTs have been around since 2014, but they have suddenly started gaining popularity for buying and selling digital artwork.
Over $174 million has been spent on NFTs since 2017 (Conti, 2021).
Connoisseurs, celebrities and speculators want access to something exclusive and to claim ownership over a piece of art that will not be replicated anytime soon.
The NFT craze is not just limited to art.
Remember those sports cards you used to collect as a child? They have now become digital and are represented as sports moments with movement and sound, and each of them is one of a kind.
This uniqueness is making collectors reach deep into their pockets to pull out millions of dollars without a second thought.
You might be wondering, what is so special about a sports clip? The same clip is being edited millions of times on all social media platforms.
People are making TikTok videos, reels, and whatnot with those clips, so why would somebody want to spend a fortune for it? Well, it might not make sense for you, but a crazy sports fan would take pride in owning the "original" clip.
These NFTs give the owner a kind of digital bragging rights, and for some people, that is worth a lot.
How Do NFTs Differ From Traditional Cryptocurrencies? The crypto world has two types of tokens, which are fungible and non-fungible.
All digital currencies are fungible tokens like physical money.
This means that the value of one bitcoin will always be equal to another.
Even if it is converted to dollars, the value will remain unchanged.
Non-fungible tokens are unique and one token cannot be exchanged for one another.
For example, Mike Winklemann, the famous digital artist also known as Beeple, crafted 5,000 daily drawings to create one of the most famous NFTs of the moment.
Known as "Everydays: The First 5000 Days," it was sold at $69.3 million (Copeland, 2021).
An NBA Top Shot of LeBron James sold for $250,000.
These two NFTs are different and there cannot be any exchange between the two.
How Do NFTs Work? Like cryptocurrencies, blockchain is the central technology of NFTs.
Although many other networks support them, NFTs are most commonly found on the Ethereum blockchain.
These tokens are created or "minted" from digital objects, which may represent art, GIFs, sports highlights, collectibles, video game skins, virtual avatars, designer sneakers, music, and any other tangible or intangible item.
An NFT is not much different from buying a painting from an art gallery.
Instead of hanging it in your living room, you get a digital file with the original artwork or collectibleownership is verified with the help of a unique digital signature, which is proof of authenticity.
What Are the Uses of NFTs? Artists have always had a hard time finding buyers for their art through galleries or auction houses.
Often, they do not get the price they are looking for.
Even if they do find a suitable buyer, much of the profit gets eaten up by intermediaries.
NFTs remove this barrier because they connect the artist directly with the consumer.
We are not here to talk just about art, which is why it is important to understand the benefits NFTs provide for investors as well.
The removal of intermediaries enables a buyer to pay the right price for their desired piece of art.
Moreover, NFTs have created a demand for some strange yet impactful things.
Popular brands like Taco Bell, Coca-Cola and Charmin have used NFTs to raise money for charity.
These tokens improve market efficiency by easily converting a physical item to a digital asset and assigning a suitable value to it.
If used correctly, NFTs have the potential to revolutionize complex investments like real estate.
Division of property can become much easier by assigning an NFT of each part of the property to every owner.
Decentraland is a virtual reality platform on the Ethereum network which has implemented a similar concept.
It is assumed that as NFTs become more developed, we will be able to implement the concept of tokenized pieces of land to physical real estate as well based on their value and location.
UNDERSTANDING THE VALUE OF NFTS The biggest reason why certain NFTs are so valuable is because of their scarcity.
Imagine waiting in line for a long time to buy something exclusive.
NFTs are simply the digital version of that same event.
As with many other collectibles, the value of NFTs is linked to their scarcity.
There is only one original version of the Mona Lisa, and if you wish to own it, you will have to pay its price.
NFTs derive their value from a similar logic.
Because they are rare or unique, they are often valued at millions of dollars.
Except, unlike physical art which is often replicated or faked, because of the underlying records stored on the blockchain, it is impossible to fake or duplicate an NFT because of their immutable transaction history.
The Four Components of NFT Value Scarcity cannot be considered as the only factor while determining the value of NFTs, which is why the following formula is often used to understand and deconstruct their value.
Depending on which asset the NFT represents, the following elements are used by the investors to figure out whether the token is worth spending money for.
Creators also consider these elements to check whether there is scope for increasing the value.
Value of an NFT = Utility + Ownership History + Future Value + Liquidity Premium Utility The utility is one of the biggest indicators of determining the value for any asset, and NFTs are no exception.
Two of the most popular items that determine utility in the world of NFTs are tickets and game assets.
A powerful and rare Crypto Space Battleship token was sold for $45,250 in 2019 (Chang, 2020).
This is also why Axie Infinity has taken off so much, because each Axie character functions as its own NFT, and as the Axie gains more powers within the game, it increases in value.
Another way to determine the utility of an NFT is determining whether this token can be used in any other application.
Although the chances of this happening are quite rare because there is an inherent lack of interoperability, if the space battleship could be used in another game, then its value would be high.
It must be noted that multiple applications do not signify exchange like a fungible token.
Right now, the NFT space is dominated by a few games, and to make the tokens universally acceptable, a massive ecosystem needs to be developed.
Ownership History The identity of the creator or issuer and previous owners of the NFT play a very important role in determining its value.
Digital art creators can consider partnering with companies with a high brand value to issue their tokens since a high ownership history is instrumental in increasing the price of the token.
The value of the NFT might also increase was previously owned by somebody influential.
Various marketplaces and trading platforms allow users and investors to track individuals who have made the most profit using NFTs.
Future Value The future value of an NFT has two components: valuation changes and future cash flow.
Since the financial market is highly driven by speculation right now, the future value can change drastically within a short span, which can become the main driver for the valuation of the NFT.
Scarcity and speculation can drive NFT prices like nothing else, which is what makes it one of the most important determinants of their value.
Liquidity Premium On-chain NFTs offer greater liquidity than off-chain ones.
For example, if an NFT is available on the Ethereum network, anyone holding Ether can easily trade in those NFTs and their risk of liquidity will be significantly reduced.
That is why investors like to invest in NFTs that have a high trading value.
Apart from all these factors, another important point that determines the value of NFTs is the individual investor's perception.
For example, for a crazy basketball fan, a clip of LeBron James dunking NBA Top Shots might be priceless, which can drive them to pay a very high amount for a so-called "useless" asset.
SNEAKY WAYS TO PROFIT FROM THE BOOM OF NFTS NFTs are still at their early stages, which is why there is a lot of speculation in this sector.
Like we keep saying, just because everyone else is doing it doesn't mean you have to spend money on NFTs as well.
Our suggestion is to not buy the NFTs themselves if you are not into collecting rare and collectible items.
The big meme NFTs like Crypto Kitties or Cyberpunks are highly manipulated, which is why you might end up buying something worthless.
Since the space is still relatively new, you have to do your research to understand the profit element in them.
Earning From NFTs if You Are a Creator For creators, NFTs are a great way to showcase their art to a bigger audience.
When Beeple's painting collage made a record at Christie's by selling at $69.3 million, the whole world understood that NFTs can mean something huge for creators of digital art.
Many people believe that paying millions for a link to a picture is nothing but a scam, but the consensus is that NFTs will revolutionize the whole art space.
Creators of sports cards can also earn a fortune by selling their NFTs.
Sports cards have always been extremely popular among their collectors, but physical cards have the risk of getting destroyed.
NFTs eliminate any such risks by tokenizing the cards.
Not just sports cards, creators of any rare collectibles can create their NFTs and sell them on the digital marketplace.
Companies involved in developing games have their eyes set on NFTs after the phenomenal success of Axie Infinity.
Gamers are famous for spending recklessly while playing, which is why the gaming industry can benefit a lot from NFTs.
World of Warcraft gold or Call of Duty loot boxes and other video game skins are already worth billions of dollars, and if any game thinks about selling in-game items as NFTs, it could boost their income tremendously (Leyes, 2021).
Trading NFTs Although we do not recommend trading directly in NFTs due to the inherent risks involved, you can give it a try if you feel you have enough knowledge about artsy collectibles and how this market works.
A Miami-based art collector named Pablo Rodriguez-Fraile sold a digital art piece by Beeple for almost 1,000 times its initial price (Fintelics, 2021).
The value of NFTs varies significantly, which means among two similar art pieces, one can be worth millions and another completely worthless.
This makes direct trading of NFTs difficult and unpredictable.
Earning Passive Income From NFTs If you are someone who has purchased an NFT on the spur of the moment and now don't know what to do with it, here are a few ways through which you can earn passive income from them: Renting Out NFTs: Many card trading games give the option of borrowing NFTs to increase their chances of winning.
These agreements are governed by smart contracts which will keep you safe when you rent your NFTs.
will be allowed to set the rental agreement, including lease rate and duration, so the whole deal stays under your control.
Royalties: As the creator of an NFT, you can mint it in such a way that it gives you a fixed percentage of royalty every time it is sold in the secondary market.
Smart contracts control the entire process and you don't have to worry about asking for royalties.
Staking NFTs: The combination of NFTs with decentralized finance allows you to "stake" your purchased NFTs, which is a process of locking your tokens and earning a subsequent yield from them with the help of a DeFi protocol smart contract.
Providing Liquidity: Decentralized finance gives you the option to provide liquidity by using your NFTs.
Where Can You Trade NFTs? The first step would be to have a cryptocurrency wallet through which the transactions will take place.
The good news is that because the vast majority of NFTs are on the Ethereum blockchain, then any wallet with Ethereum compatibility will suffice.
The most NFT friendly wallet is Metamask, which comes with features like a browser extension and the ability to set up multiple addresses.
The latter is useful if you would like to hold your NFTs in a separate wallet from your regular crypto holdings.
We have a video tutorial on setting up your Metamask wallet at https://freemanpublications.com/cryptotutorials Most NFT trades take place using cryptocurrency (usually Ethereum), so you would need the required currency as well.
These are the most popular digital marketplaces that facilitate buying and selling of NFTs: Open Sea.io: This is a digital platform that hosts a collection of rare items, and you can easily access them by creating an account.
You can also find popular artists by filtering by their sales volume.
Rarible: This platform uses Rari tokens for fees and other community rules.
Rarible is a democratic platform where you can easily access and trade NFTs.
Foundation: This is more of an exclusive platform where artists can only post their art after receiving an invitation from a collector.
These invitations are called "upvotes." Foundation has a high entry cost since artists have to purchase "gas" to mint NFTs.
This is a premium platform attracting collectors who can pay very high prices.
Chris Torres sold the famous Nyan Cat NFT through Foundation.
NFT-Specific Marketplaces: Certain NFTs trade directly on their own platforms like NBA TopShot, Larva Labs (CryptoPunks) and Axie Marketplace.
UNDERSTAND THE RISKS AND INVEST IN THE PLATFORMS The barriers to entry in the NFT market are extremely low.
Anybody can create an NFT and obtain a digital certificate for it, which is why it is necessary to consider the following risk factors before investing in NFTs: NFTs might be subject to copyright issues.
Anybody can create a digital token from an asset, after which they are assigned a digital signature which acts as a verification.
However, this digital key is not a guarantee of initial ownership, which is what raises a question about their genuineness.
No formal rules and regulations are governing NFTs, which is why their price can change at the whim of the manipulators.
OpenSea issued a statement stating that one of their employees purchased NFTs knowing that they would be featured on OpenSea's front page.
After they were published, the prices of the NFTs were boosted and they sold them at a high profit.
This shows the amount of unregulated manipulation that exists in this market.
Since NFTs are still in a nascent phase, we recommend against trying to make money by trading NFTs themselves.
We preferred a picks and shovels approach where we invest in platforms like Solana and Polkadot that facilitate the sale of NFTs, rather than the NFTs directly.
Outside Shot Sports-related NFTs are extremely popular in this market, which is why an under-the-radar play is to buy stocks from sports teams with an NFT angle.
Suppose an NFT is created by Manchester United featuring Cristiano Ronaldo scoring the winning goal in a cup final.
There won't be any question about its rising values, and subsequently, the club to which the player belongs will also profit from this NFT.
That is why you can consider investing in stocks like Madison Square Garden (MSGE), Liberty Global (LBTY), Manchester United (LSE:MANU), and Juventus (BIT:JUVE).
In this way, you will be able to get exposure to NFTs without suffering from their volatility directly.
Despite the buzz around NFTs, it is still early to comment on their long-term viability right now.
If used properly, they have the potential to become a good virtual twin for a digital asset, especially in sectors like real estate, by easing the trading process, allowing simple divisions, and tracing its history and ownership.
Remember though that this is a highly speculative and volatile market, and that fundamental, technical, or economic factors often fail to impact NFT prices because everything is dependent upon demand.
Before investing, you should always consider the resale options.
An NFT might not fetch any value on resale if nobody wants it during the time you want to sell it, which makes it a bit dysfunctional as an investment.
Conduct thorough research and understand your priorities before making a decision.
9 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS FROM FIRST-TIME CRYPTO INVESTORS There is still a lot of gray area in the cryptocurrency market.
The majority of countries have yet to develop proper laws for regulating crypto.
Naturally, there is a lot of doubt about how to proceed with your investments and what the implications will be.
That is why in this chapter we will address some of the frequently asked questions from first-time crypto investors, especially concerning its taxation and future planning.
Even if you have invested in crypto before, the answers to these questions will come in handy when you are stuck.
Can I Own Bitcoin/Ethereum in My IRA? Investing in cryptocurrencies as a part of your retirement portfolio can be a good idea since it might result in substantially higher returns.
You have the option of investing in cryptos through a self-directed IRA because normal IRAs do not allow you to put your money in alternative assets.
The money that you deposit in this self-directed IRA will be invested to purchase cryptocurrencies instead of normal mutual funds.
For a Bitcoin IRA, you have to remember that a custodian like a bank or a financial institution ensures that your account is following the relevant rules and regulations.
The biggest advantage of a Bitcoin IRA is that you get the benefit of diversification since the value of cryptocurrencies is not linked with stocks.
Even if the stock market is going down, you have the chance to earn phenomenally high returns.
Both Bitcoin and Ethereum have shown huge growth over the last couple of years, and they are expected to continue this trend.
Investing in a Bitcoin IRA gives you tax benefits like a normal IRA.
If you decide to open a Bitcoin IRA, here are a few leading providers which will allow you to choose from a variety of cryptocurrencies to invest in: BitIRA Bitcoin IRA Equity Trust iTrustCapital Regal Assets (if you want to own more cryptocurrencies beyond just Bitcoin) Please do your due diligence before converting anything over to a Bitcoin or Crypto IRA.
Especially be sure to take note of all fees associated with setting up and maintaining the account.
Self directed IRAs can be time consuming and expensive to set up (and even more so if you do things incorrectly).
This is not a financial decision that you want to make on a whim.
Can I Own Cryptocurrency in a 401(k) Account? Technically, it is possible, but if you are under an employer-sponsored 401(k) plan, you will not be allowed to put that money in cryptocurrencies.
This is because employer-sponsored plans are covered by the ERISA fiduciary rules, which protect the investors from the volatility of large losses.
Since the primary objective of a 401(k) account is to save money for retirement, the ERISA fiduciary rules ensure that the money in this account is kept safe.
However, if you are a self-employed person sponsoring your retirement through a Solo 401(k), you can choose to invest a part of it in cryptocurrencies.
QUESTIONS REGARDING TAXABILITY OF CRYPTOCURRENCIES First of all, I would like to clarify that we are not tax professionals.
We are here to talk about cryptocurrencies and are not providing tax advice.
We recommend that you consult your local professional when you are filing your tax returns because there may be certain issues that are specific to you.
There is still huge confusion about the taxability of cryptocurrencies.
Cryptocurrencies are yet to receive the status of "medium of exchange," so they are not taxed in the exact same way as stocks are.
Do I Have to Pay Taxes on My Crypto Gains? Yes, you do.
The IRS (and HMRC in the UK) treats capital gains on cryptocurrency the same way they treat stocks.
They are considered as personal assets of the holder.
When you sell cryptocurrencies, you have to pay capital gains on the amount of profit that you earned.
Gambling wins are exempt from tax in the UK, but cryptocurrency transactions are not considered gambling, which is why you must pay taxes on the gains.
It is not considered a currency since it is not issued by any central bank.
If you are holding crypto for less than 365 days, you will have to pay short-term taxes on the gains.
Long-term capital gains will be taxed if you are holding the currencies for a longer period.
Which Crypto Transactions Are Taxed? The IRS considers the following transactions related to cryptocurrencies as taxable: Selling cryptocurrency which you have personally mined to a third party.
If you have mined cryptocurrency and sold it to a third party for a profit, then that profit will be liable for capital gain taxes.
Selling cryptocurrency to a third party which you have purchased.
If you have bought cryptocurrencies from an exchange and sold them to a third party for a profit, then you will be paying capital gains taxes on it.
Buying goods or services with cryptocurrency which you have mined.
For example, if you purchased a pizza using cryptocurrency that you mined, then that transaction will attract capital gains taxes.
The amount of taxes will depend on the nature of the transaction and the value of cryptocurrency in comparison to that of the pizza.
Buying goods and services with cryptocurrency which you have bought.
If you purchased cryptocurrencies from an exchange and subsequently used the same for buying some goods or services, such a transaction will attract capital gain taxes.
In the second and fourth scenarios, it is a lot like investing in an asset.
However, for the cases where you are mining the cryptocurrency, you may be able to get deductions for any expenses which you have incurred during the mining process.
Does a Cryptocurrency Miner Have to Pay Taxes? As mentioned above, the mining of cryptocurrencies is a taxable event and the fair market value will be the current value of the currency at the time of being mined.
If you are in the business of cryptocurrency mining, then you can claim the expenses that you have incurred like resources, software and save big bucks on your taxes.
However, if you have mined the coins for personal benefit, you will not be getting any deduction.
Are Cryptocurrency Conversions Taxed? Conversions between Bitcoin and Ether, or between any other currencies, were considered as a like-kind transfer and income tax on such transactions could be deferred as per the permissions of the IRS.
However, the IRS put a stop to it after they found rampant exploitations of this provision.
It was stated by the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 that like-kind transactions could take place only in real estate.
However, if you transfer cryptocurrency from one wallet to another, it will not be considered a sale and hence no capital gains will be attracted.
What Happens When There Is a Hard Fork in the Blockchain? A hard fork is an incident when a blockchain undergoes a protocol change and the old cryptocurrencies on the network are dropped.
A new coin is created which is different from its predecessor in mining and features.
Holders of the original cryptocurrency may be allotted new coins, and this phenomenon is called an airdrop.
IRS clarified that there are no tax implications of a hard fork, but when the holder receives units of a new cryptocurrency, it results in gross income and is subsequently taxed as normal income.
What Happens When I Donate, Gift, or Inherit Cryptocurrencies? The donation of crypto is treated the same way as cash donations.
The amount of gain as calculated by an appraiser during the time of donation will not attract any tax.
Gifts of cryptocurrencies below $15,000 are not subject to tax but will be taxed once this limit is exceeded.
Inheritance of cryptocurrency is treated the same way as other estate assets.
Filing and Reducing Crypto Taxes In our years of academic and practical experience, we have gathered knowledge about the tax filing process, which we are sharing with you.
Please consult your tax advisor regarding your particular tax situation.
Keep a record of all transactions: The IRS has made it mandatory for every person to keep a record of cryptocurrency transactions.
This will include details of your purchases, how long you have held the currencies, and records of every transaction where you used crypto to buy any goods or services.
Your crypto exchange will provide a 1099-B form to both you and the IRS as a report of your transactions, but this might not include the transactions you made between offline cold wallets.
You can use the help of software packages like Koinly or Cointracker, which help you to track all your cryptocurrency transactions across all blockchains, even if they are not on the network.
Fill out the proper forms: If you are making transactions in cryptocurrencies, you must fill out the correct forms to avoid penalties.
Depending on how you are using crypto, there are various forms to fill.
Form 8949 logs crypto as an investment where you have to enter the number of coins held, date and price of purchase and sale, and the amount of loss and gain.
Schedule D will summarize all your capital gains, including ones from crypto.
If you have mined cryptocurrencies, you have to disclose details in Schedule C.
In case you have mined coins as a hobby, you have to disclose that in Schedule 1.
File your taxes: Using a software package like Koinly or Cointracker will help you to keep track of all the transactions, and then you can link this record to your main federal and state tax form.
You can also choose to opt for a package like TokenTax, which is an integrated solution for both your cryptocurrency and regular taxes.
They will provide you with assistance with the entire thing.
If all these discussions about taxes are making you anxious, don't worry.
Here are a few ways through which you can save on cryptocurrency taxes in the future: Holding your cryptocurrencies for a longer term will help you save a lot on taxes.
Depending on how much you have earned during the year, your short-term capital gains rate is around 37% while your long-term rate will be lower.
So just by retaining the investments for a longer period, you can cut your tax rate significantly.
The main reason why people hold cryptocurrency investments is to take advantage of the volatility and cash in profits when the market is at a high.
If you are thinking about selling a huge chunk of your holdings for profit, take a look at your other investments and see if you are incurring heavy losses in any of them.
If your other holdings (whether crypto or not) are at a loss, then you can sell those during the same year to offset the gains from your crypto investment sale.
When you invest in crypto funds or ETFs through retirement accounts like self-directed IRA or 401(k), you get the benefits of tax deferment 10 COMMON CRYPTO SCAMS TO WATCH OUT FOR Whenever something new pops up, there are always bad actors snooping around to make a quick buck.
Along with all the good investment, this industry has also become home to a variety of fraudsters and scammers.
According to the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) Consumer Sentinel, from October 2020 through March 31, 2021, reports of crypto-related scams skyrocketed to nearly 7,000 people reporting losses of more than $80 million.
These figures reflect a 12-fold increase in the number of reports compared to the same period a year ago and a nearly 1,000% rise in reported losses (Liebkind, 2021).
In this chapter, we will talk about the various scams that the cryptocurrency industry is seeing so that you don't fall prey to them.
USE OF AUTHORITY FIGURES AND POP CULTURE One trend which I have been noticing in the past few months is that people who used to sell real estate seminars or forex seminars have suddenly become "experts in cryptocurrencies" and are more than eager to show you how much they have gained in the last two or three months.
If you have come across such people, take a thousand steps back from them and think about the big picture.
Look for people who have been doing this for years, not months.
People are always jumping on the bandwagon, which is why you will find 20-year-old kids who have made a couple of trades turning into self-proclaimed gurus.
Here are two such very common methods of scamming people in the crypto market: Use of Authority Figures The Federal Trade Commission reports that Elon Musk Impersonators have made more than $2 million in recent years as a part of various cryptocurrency scams.
The nature of this scam is in the form of a "giveaway".
You will find tweets from famous personalities like Elon Musk, Barack Obama, or Joe Biden which will mention something about a giveaway.
The message will state that if you send cryptocurrencies to the given wallet, they will be multiplied immediately and returned to you.
People who have sent the currencies have done so to the wallet of a fraudster.
There is no giveaway or any scheme; impersonators create fake profiles for these authority figures and try to trick people into sending them cryptocurrency.
Once they receive the currencies, they sell them on any exchange to earn a profit.
Figure 11: A fake “Elon Musk” Twitter profile running a crypto scam.
Note the Twitter handle not matching the name Use of Pop Culture Using pop culture to trick people has become increasingly common in the cryptocurrency market.
This creates a golden opportunity for scammers who hype a pop culture-based currency to raise money from passionate investors.
After they have earned enough money, they simply vanish and there won't be any existence of the coin or the people who were initially promoting it.
Mando was one such cryptocurrency that was created around Disney-themed show The Mandalorian.
Even after losing thousands of dollars, people did not learn and they again got scammed through the Squid Game cryptocurrency.
We will discuss this one in detail in a later section of this chapter.
TYPES OF CRYPTO SCAMS In the previous section, we talked about what happens in the common cryptocurrency scams.
Now let's get into a bit more detail and discuss the various types of scams that have taken place.
Broadly, there are two categories of crypto scams: Trying to gain access to your crypto wallet.
This would include getting information that gives out details about your private key and is a form of hacking into your account.
Note: No cryptocurrency exchange will ever ask for your private key.
So be sure to watch out for phishing emails from scammers attempting to impersonate Coinbase or Binance.
Transferring crypto directly to the fraudster's account by impersonating someone or using fraudulent business opportunities.
Under these two broad categories, crypto scams take various other forms which we have discussed as follows: Social Engineering Scams These scams use manipulation and psychologically pressure the victims to gain information related to their crypto wallets.
The victims are made to believe they are dealing with a trusted person like a government agency, community member, colleague, or a reputed business.
The whole process is to mess with their minds so that they do not hesitate to share information or even send cryptocurrency directly to the scammer.
The various scams under this segment are: Romance Scams: Fraudsters use dating apps to make victims feel they are in a romantic relationship after which they ask for money from them.
Cryptocurrency transactions make up a huge part of these scams.
Imposter and Giveaway Scams.
Phishing Scams: They are a way to obtain information related to cryptocurrency wallets and private keys.
The process is that the victims receive emails that direct them to a specially curated website that tries to capture the above-mentioned information.
Blackmail Scams: Here the victim is blackmailed into providing information about private keys or transferring cryptocurrencies to the scammer's wallet.
They might also be given threats about unpleasant consequences if they failed to comply.
Business Opportunity Scams Always remember the phrase that if something is too good to be true, then it probably is.
There is no such thing as "get rich quick" or "make millions overnight" in the crypto market.
People who have made millions did so as a result of speculation.
Most of them had no idea or control over the fact that cryptocurrencies would make them rich.
That is why if you hear somebody claiming that they would make you rich or provide guaranteed returns in the crypto market, run in the opposite direction because it is a scam.
Pump and Dump Scams Pump and dump scams are nothing new.
They’ve plagued the stock market for years as scammers have artificially inflated the prices of penny stocks before cashing out.
This is a phenomenon where fraudsters first pump the price of a cryptocurrency by spreading false information about the currency and its prospects.
(Recall the example of DeTrade in Chapter 4.).
Then, after the price of the coin has been boosted, the fraudsters sell all their holdings to make a huge profit and leave the other investors at a loss for words and money.
These are now becoming increasingly common on social media with invitations to “insider trading” groups appearing in people’s direct messages on Facebook, Instagram and Twitter.
Some of these now blatantly advertise themselves as “pump groups”.
Figure 12: An example of a Pump and Dump group on Telegram and subsequent market activity on the targeted coin (Source: ResearchGate) These scams are also increasingly prevalent in the comment sections of cryptocurrency YouTube channels.
Remember if anyone approaches you on social media offering a get-rich-quick trading opportunity, avoid it like the plague.
A good rule of thumb is to remember that anyone promising that they know which crypto coin will pump next, likely has an ulterior motive.
Figure 13: An example of a Pump and Dump group recruiting message, sent via Instagram Fake Trading Scams Ever been approached by a “Bitcoin trader” on social media? Unfortunately this happened to one of our readers, who we’ll just call D.
D allowed me to share her story in full in order to prevent others suffering the same fate, so I’ve decided to re-print it here.
This was originally published in our daily newsletter on December 3rd 2021, to sign up to our newsletter just go to https://freemanpublications.com/bonus --- A reader, who I'll just call D, emailed me yesterday to ask if I had heard of a certain brokerage website.
I hadn't...
which automatically raises a red flag seeing as I do this for a living.
The website in question appears to be somewhat legit at first glance, claiming to be registered in Switzerland.
So I asked D why she was inquiring about the website.
D shared her story and has graciously allowed me to reprint it to help other readers avoid the same fate.
"I was using [scam website] as training to learn investing.
I made an investment of $250.00 US and a broker worked with me and showed me trades and of course as we traded the money initially invested grew.
We did a little investing with crypto through their platform.
I signed up for CoinBase and bought Bitcoin that we transferred over.
Altogether my investment was $4,750 Canadian.
I attempted to withdraw money from the [scam website] account to my CoinSmart account and I received an email saying that in order to get my funds I had to pay a liquidation fee of $4,900 CDN.
I didn’t have the $4,900 on the spot.
Our e-transfers are limited which in hindsight is a good thing.
It didn’t seem right, why did I have to pay a fee to withdraw funds? I spoke with CoinSmart and they told me that the email I received about the liquidation fee didn’t come from them." I advised D to not pay any kind of "liquidation fee" and to cut her losses at this point.
The "broker" is still contacting her - which is part of the scam.
Here's a breakdown of exactly how the scam works 1.
A broker contacts you, usually via social media, asking you sign up and deposit a small amount of money with them.
2.
These companies will access your computer via some kind of remote desktop software like AnyDesk and conduct "trades" on your account (while explaining what they're doing to make it seem legit).
These trades will always be profitable because they aren't real and instead use dummy software to replicate real trades.
3.
The company gets you to wire a larger amount of money to them (this can be in fiat currency, but more commonly now using crypto).
4.
More fake trades occur with the intention of getting you to wire them even more money.
5.
If you ever try to withdraw the money...
either the company ghosts you on the spot...
or they will start some BS about "withdrawal fees" or "liquidation fees" which are often more than your entire investment.
--- Now here’s how to avoid how this ever happening to you 1.
Only use well known brokerages (like CoinBase, Binance or Crypto.com).
If you aren't sure about a brokerage, look them up in their local jurisdiction.
All brokers (stocks, crypto, FOREX) are required to register with their local financial authority (like FINRA in the US or the FCA in the United Kingdom) and will have a unique license number which you can look up online.
For example, Coinbase has been licensed by FINRA and the SEC since 2010.
You can lookup US brokers at https://brokercheck.finra.org/ And in the UK you can go to https://register.fca.org.uk/ 2.
Never allow anyone to trade on your behalf - either via wiring money to them or by allowing them to access your computer via a remote desktop.
3.
If it smells like a scam, it probably is.
Cloud Mining Scams Cloud mining scams have been around since cryptocurrency first really started becoming popular in 2016.
The premise is similar to any Ponzi scheme.
Websites will ask you to deposit either fiat money or cryptocurrency to be part of a cryptocurrency mining group.
Usually they will promise huge gains of up to 1.5% PER DAY.
Many of these websites with display fake figures in an attempt to provide their legitimacy.
These include listed giant number of users or statistics claiming they have been in business for many years.
Other tell-tale signs of a scam are attempts to keep all communication on Telegram or WhatsApp as opposed to channels like email.
Figure 14: USDminer claims to have 36 million registered users, however the website was less than 1 month old at the time of writing The following active websites are confirmed to be scam mining operations Xminer Miner Plus Pageminer Nhash USDminer Muxminer Fake Bitcoin Lending Schemes Another common crypto scam is in the form of a "lending scheme", where you receive regular payouts for the cryptocurrencies that you have supposedly lent to the borrower.
We should note that there are legitimate cryptocurrency lending schemes via platforms like Celsius, Block-Fi or Crypto.com.
However there are also many outright scam platforms, some of which made off with tens of millions in investor money.
Here are the 2 most prominent ones.
Bitconnect This is one of the most famous crypto scams, and became so big that it even made the top 10 list of coins according to market cap.
They offered a kind of lending scheme where your currencies would be locked and you would receive a payout regularly.
Their project initially claimed they had an AI-enabled trading bot that guaranteed abnormal profits for all their holders.
The impossibly high payouts (1% daily compounding interest) combined with the multi-level marketing nature of the platform meant that the initial payouts were only funded by new money being deposited into the scheme, and not by the trading bot itself.
Davorcoin Similar to Bitconnect, Davorcoin was introduced as an ICO and had lending programs where the investors could receive a payout.
There was a presence of a pyramid-like affiliate program and fake promises of a crypto debit card which never saw the light of day.
CASE STUDY: SQUID GAME CRYPTO SCAM On September 17, 2021, a Korean show called Squid Game was released on Netflix.
The plotline centered around hundreds of cash-strapped people fighting simple games in a do-or-die situation to win a huge cash prize.
The show became an instant hit across the world and reached the #1 position within a matter of days.
Consequently, the Internet started flooding with Squid Game memes and posts.
When the whole world was obsessed with the show in October 2021, a group of developers released a Squid Game token (SQUID) which was listed on CoinMarketCap.
The coin was themed surrounding the popular show and started trading at $0.02 per token on October 26th.
By November, the price of the token had risen to $2,800, which meant an increase of 14,300,000% in a matter of weeks.
The phenomenal increase had something fishy about it.
You guessed it right, it was a classic example of a pump-and-dump scheme, but the public was yet to understand that.
Now let's deconstruct what happened and how the price rose by such high margins.
A group of developers who have conveniently stayed anonymous launched this crypto project called Squid Game.
This token would be used as an entry pass or "buy-in" to Squid Game-themed games like Red Light/Green Light and Honeycomb.
The winners of these games would be rewarded with cash prizes.
When they won a game, they would be rewarded with "marbles", another reference from the show.
The developers used an anti-dumping strategy, which implied that unless a player won a marble, they wouldn't be able to sell their tokens.
All of it sounds perfectly fine in theory until we come to the real catch of the situation.
The developers had yet to come up with a real game for this Squid Game project.
This meant that the players had no option to win the marbles because there was no game for them to play.
Until they won the marbles, there was no way to sell the tokens, which means they were trapped in a situation over which they had no control and there was nothing to be done.
The players thought they were waiting for the games to begin, but that never happened.
The craze surrounding the show skyrocketed the prices of the token, and eventually, the developers cashed out the coins and took away $12 million.
This is nothing but an outright fraud and the developers should immediately be put behind bars.
More than anything, this is a lesson for all crypto investors to not gamble on crypto created around the latest hype.
The hype will die down soon, and so will the price of the token.
The phenomenal rise is simply a trick to keep you interested and invested.
Just like there are penny stock frauds in the stock markets, there are bogus tokens and rug pulls in the crypto market.
Would you avoid the stock market because of those penny stocks? If not, then why should you avoid the crypto space because of these scams? The key to succeeding in any market is the same—go for the genuine stocks and tokens.
Pick the best cryptos, not something random like Squid Game.
11 11 CRYPTO PREDICTIONS FOR 2022 Every year in our daily newsletter (which you can join at https://freemanpublications.com/bonus) I like to make predictions for the coming financial year.
This year I thought I’d do something a little more permanent and print them in our book.
So here we go, my 11 crypto predictions for 2022.
A Q1 bear market will see Bitcoin drop below $40,000 before reaching $100,000 by the end of the year.
Another Bitcoin ETF will launch, except this one will track the spot price of Bitcoin rather than Bitcoin futures like BITO.
Ethereum will become the next Trillion Dollar coin (this would put the price of 1 ETH at around $7,300).
But they still won’t move to Proof of Stake until 2023.
Solana will reach a market cap of over $200 Billion by the end of the year.
Solana will also “decouple” from Bitcoin, meaning that its price will move independent of Bitcoin prices.
At least 1 major country will announce that some of its national debt has been collateralized using stablecoins.
A new government body will be created to regulate cryptoassets (and this will be a good thing in the long run).
A least 1 Fortune 500 company will allow full-time employees to be paid in cryptocurrency.
There will be at least 1 major fraud case in the NFT market.
NFT marketplace OpenSea will do traditional IPO, despite calls for the company to do an ICO on the crypto markets instead.
Blockchain gaming will provide a new onboarding into the crypto space, which will significantly increase the overall number of people owning cryptocurrency.
At least one meme coin with a $1 Billion market cap will completely collapse.
Feel free to email me your own predictions at admin@freemanpublications.com.
CONCLUSION: AMARA’S LAW AND PLAYING THE LONG GAME Roy Amara isn’t exactly a household name, except in Futurism circles.
The Stanford researcher who passed away in 2007, gave us one of the most poignant quotes about technology in the past 100 years, which has since been coined “Amara’s Law” “We tend to overestimate the effect of a technology in the short run and underestimate the effect in the long run”.
This is no more true than in the crypto world.
Whenever you come across articles about cryptocurrencies, you will find two extremes being portrayed - either the article claims that cryptos are the ultimate savior of humankind or they will caution you because they are purely speculative and always bring you eternal doom.
The truth is that while cryptocurrency is new, within just a few years of their existence, it has managed to make its mark on us and the economy.
Like it or not, cryptocurrency is here to stay.
However, you must understand that this is not a linear journey to riches.
There is going to be continued volatility in this space for the next 5 years at least.
And you should fully expect any cryptocurrency you buy to decline by at least 50% at some point if you are planning to hold it for at least five years.
But if you can stomach those downturns, many of these millionaire maker assets will be the ones that allow you to retire early, put your kids through college, and create generational wealth for you and your loved ones.
To illustrate this, let’s take one final look at Bitcoin price fluctuations.
THE ROLLERCOASTER OF BITCOIN PRICES Since its inception, Bitcoin has been notorious for having the highest highs and coming down to the lowest lows within months.
Bitcoin first hit $1 in April 2011.
In July 2011, the value rose to $29.60, which means a 2,960% increase within three months.
After a sharp recession, the value came down to $2.05 by November.
After an uneventful 2012, Bitcoin rose rapidly in 2013 from $13.28 in the beginning to $230 in April and then fell drastically to $68.50 within a few weeks.
The year ended with an all-time high of $1,237.55, only to fall by almost 44% within the next three days.
Bitcoin struggled with its prices throughout 2014 and 2015 with no major highs or lows.
By the end of 2016, Bitcoin was priced at $900 and increased by 122% in the next six months.
However, the real high came in December 2017 when Bitcoin skyrocketed to $19,345.49.
This was the moment when it truly attracted the attention of the entire world and all spheres of the economy.
The next two years were again uneventful, and prices fell to around $6,000 by December 2019.
When the economy was shut down due to the COVID-19 Pandemic, Bitcoin prices again showed bursts of activity after starting 2020 at $6,965.72.
The year ended for Bitcoin on the highest-ever note after increasing 416% from the beginning of the year and reaching $29,000 in December 2020.
Bitcoin had reached a bull run and kept smashing its records by reaching $40,000 in January 2021 and $63,000 in April 2021.
Prices started falling soon after, and the summer of 2021 saw a 50% decline.
However, Bitcoin again reached an all-time high of $67,549.14 in November 2021, only to fall by 22% within a month when the economy started having a scare about the Omicron variant of COVID-19.
Since 2009, here are some of the volatility events Bitcoin has undergone: 10 drawdowns of over 30% 5 drawdowns of over 50% 3 drawdowns of over 80% 1 drawdown of over 90% The most important thing to take from this though, is that even with all these pullbacks, Bitcoin and the entire cryptocurrency space continues to move into new highs.
In 2021 alone we saw the value of the cryptocurrency industry go from $800 Billion to over $2.8 Trillion in just 10 months.
PLAY SMART As you can already see, drawdowns are an integral part of investing in crypto and you should not go for investing in this market if that bothers you.
Our suggestion is to dedicate 5-10% of your portfolio to cryptocurrency.
In this way, even if you lose everything, your maximum loss will be limited to only 10%.
If the bullish thesis is correct, then that 5% can be worth 50% of your portfolio or more.
This asymmetric bet will ensure a high upside and minimal downside.
Although in the short term most crypto prices still mirror Bitcoin prices, you can end up enjoying a greater gain percentage if you hold different types of currencies.
For instance, when prices of both Bitcoin and Ethereum are rising, the rate of increase in Ethereum might be greater than that of Bitcoin.
Even if the total value of your portfolio is huge, start small with crypto.
The amount invested should be something that you are comfortable losing.
No matter what everyone says, there is no rule that you have to invest in crypto to make money.
Some people simply don’t have the required risk appetite.
However, there is no doubt that crypto is the next big financial asset class, and the riskiest financial move you can make over the next decade is not owning any.
As we have explained through the course of this book, investing in crypto does not have to be very difficult.
Whenever you feel like you are having doubts, just refer to this book.
Alternatively, you can email us at admin@freemanpublications.com if you would like something clarified.
We answer every single reader email.
2021 was a chaotic year, so as we move into 2022, we wish you the best of luck with your investing! One final word from us.
If this book has helped you in any way, we’d appreciate it if you left a review on Amazon.
Reviews are the lifeblood of our business.
We read every single one and incorporate your feedback into our future book projects.
To leave an Amazon review, scan the QR code below or go to https://freemanpublications.com/leaveareview ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This book is a team effort, and while I get to be the face of the business and receive all the kind messages from readers, I can’t ignore the people who helped make this book what it was.
Thank you first to our content team for their writing, editing, and proofreading efforts and dealing with my persistent questions about why specific changes needed to be made.
Thank you to Mark Greenberg, our superstar narrator, who has really become “the voice” of Freeman Publications over the past year.
Thank you to Ed Fahy over at UBF for always being there every time I needed to make a minor update to the book interior.
Thank you to the 400+ Freeman readers who participated in our advanced reader program for this book.
Your notes and feedback were invaluable in going from the final draft to the finished product.
A special mention must go to Carlota Wilhite and Vinay Narayanan for their incredibly detailed feedback ranging from things we didn’t clarify well enough to points we outright missed.
Without your input, this book simply would not have been as good as it is today.
Thank you to our hundreds of readers on social media for your words of encouragement throughout this project.
Finally, thank you to my family, whose initial uncertainty of “are you still doing that book thing” has blossomed into full support for my vision here at Freeman Publications.
This means more than you will ever know.
Oliver London, England January, 2022 OTHER BOOKS BY FREEMAN PUBLICATIONS (AVAILABLE ON AMAZON & AUDIBLE) You can learn more about our other titles by going to https://freemanpublications.com/books Or if you prefer listening you can find our Audiobooks at https://freemanpublications.com/audiobooks REFERENCES A timeline of the history of cryptocurrency.
(2021, August 31).
Tech Guide.
https://www.techguide.com.au/news/cryptocurrency/a-timeline-of-the-history-of-cryptocurrency/ abhijithoyur.
(2021, September 10).
Different ways to convert Bitcoin to fiat currency.
GeeksforGeeks.
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/different-ways-to-convert-bitcoin-to-fiat-currency/ Agarwal, K.
(2019).
Are there taxes on Bitcoins? Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/040515/are-there-taxes-bitcoins.asp Amundi.
(2021, November 2).
Can stablecoins bring major disruption to the financial system? Amundi Research Center.
https://research-center.amundi.com/article/can-stablecoins-bring-major-disruption-financial-system Analyst, Z.
(2021, November 18).
Silvergate Capital: Riding the crypto wave (NYSE:SI) | Seeking Alpha.
Seekingalpha.com.
https://seekingalpha.com/article/4470669-silvergate-capital-riding-the-crypto-wave BBVA.
(2017, November 10).
A basic dictionary of blockchain: 10 terms you should know | BBVA.
NEWS BBVA.
https://www.bbva.com/en/basic-dictionary-blockchain-10-terms-know/ Beginners, B.
for.
(2019, April 15).
Case Study: Top 5 scams in the history of crypto.
Medium.
https://medium.com/@bitcoinforbeginners/case-study-top-5-scams-in-the-history-of-crypto-df8a01443bc6 Berkowitz, B.
(2021, May 16).
Is Theta token the next Ethereum or the next Dogecoin? Www.nasdaq.com.
https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/is-theta-token-the-next-ethereum-or-the-next-dogecoin-2021-05-16 Bhasin, K.
(2021, October 28).
Matt Damon is the Face of Crypto.com.
Www.bloomberg.com.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-10-28/matt-damon-to-promote-crypto-com-in-race-to-attract-new-users Blanchet, B.
(2021, May 18).
Elon Musk impersonators have made over $2 million in crypto scams.
Complex.
https://www.complex.com/pop-culture/people-pretending-to-be-elon-musk-crypto-scams Blockgenicon, B.
(2018, November 23).
Asymmetric cryptography in Blockchains | Hacker Noon.
Hackernoon.com.
https://hackernoon.com/asymmetric-cryptography-in-blockchains-d1a4c1654a7 BLOK—Amplify Transformational Data Sharing ETF—Amplify ETFs.
(n.d.).
Amplifyetfs.com.
https://amplifyetfs.com/blok.html Catalini, C., & Massari, J.
(2021, August 10).
Stablecoins and the future of money.
Harvard Business Review.
https://hbr.org/2021/08/stablecoins-and-the-future-of-money Chang, H.
(2020, March 25).
Understanding the value of Non-Fungible Tokens (NFT).
Medium.
https://medium.com/@changhugo/understanding-the-value-of-non-fungible-tokens-nft-49d2713bdfc4 Clark, K.
(2021a).
Briefing: Stripe adds crypto investor Matt Huang to board.
The Information.
https://www.theinformation.com/briefings/d5b6ee Clark, K.
(2021b, October 19).
Multicoin capital targets $250 million for third Crypto VC fund.
The Information.
https://www.theinformation.com/articles/multicoin-capital-targets-250-million-for-third-crypto-vc-fund Clark, K., & Miller, H.
(2021, October 4).
Andreessen Horowitz values developer of NFT game Axie Infinity at $3 Billion.
The Information.
https://www.theinformation.com/articles/andreessen-horowitz-values-developer-of-nft-game-axie-infinity-at-3-billion Cohen, E.
(2021, July 1).
A cryptocurrency timeline: From eCash to Ethereum.
Vincent.
https://www.withvincent.com/learn/cryptocurrency-timeline Coinbase.
(2021a, September 8).
The SEC has told us it wants to sue us over Lend.
We don't know why.
Medium.
https://blog.coinbase.com/the-sec-has-told-us-it-wants-to-sue-us-over-lend-we-have-no-idea-why-a3a1b6507009 Coinbase.
(2021b, October 12).
Coinbase NFT is coming soon: join the waitlist today for early access.
Medium.
https://blog.coinbase.com/coinbase-nft-is-coming-soon-join-the-waitlist-today-for-early-access-cc7bac29fd72 Coinbase strategy teardown: How Coinbase grew into the King Midas of crypto doing $1B in revenue.
(2021, October 19).
CB Insights Research.
https://www.cbinsights.com/research/report/coinbase-strategy-teardown/#kingmaker Conti, R.
(2021, April 29).
What you need to know about Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs).
Forbes Advisor.
https://www.forbes.com/advisor/investing/nft-non-fungible-token/ Conway, L.
(2021, November 4).
Blockchain, explained.
Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/blockchain.asp Copeland, T.
(2021, March 11).
Beeple NFT artwork sells for $69.3 million in Christie's auction.
Decrypt.
https://decrypt.co/60971/beeples-nft-artwork-sells-for-60-3-million-in-christies-auction Dale.
(2018, February 6).
Is Falcon Coin a scam or Ponzi Scheme? Full Review exposes It! Living More Working Less.
https://www.livingmoreworkingless.com/falcon-coin-scam/ Danial, K.
(n.d.).
What is Cryptocurrency? Dummies.
https://www.dummies.com/personal-finance/what-is-cryptocurrency/ De Bode, I., Higginson, M., & Niederkorn, M.
(n.d.).
Central bank digital currency and stablecoin: Early coexistence on an uncertain road | McKinsey.
Www.mckinsey.com.
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-insights/cbdc-and-stablecoins-early-coexistence-on-an-uncertain-road Deloitte.
(n.d.).
The business benefit of using cryptocurrency.
Deloitte United States.
https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/audit/articles/corporates-using-crypto.html Dixon, C.
(2021, October 7).
Why Web3 matters.
Future.
https://future.a16z.com/why-web3-matters/ Edwards, J.
(2019).
Bitcoin's price history.
Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/forex/121815/bitcoins-price-history.asp Elena.
(2020, November 27).
What you need to know about Stellar, the altcoin that's out of this world.
The Capital.
https://medium.com/the-capital/what-you-need-to-know-about-stellar-the-altcoin-thats-out-of-this-world-eb165c92f051 Elliott, V.
(2021, September 30).
Some Axie Infinity players amassed fortunes — now the Philippine government wants its cut.
Rest of World.
https://restofworld.org/2021/axie-players-are-facing-taxes/ Fintelics.
(2021, June 9).
How to make money with NFTs—Fintelics—Medium.
Medium; Medium.
https://fintelics.medium.com/how-to-make-money-with-nfts-15a1e4718d15#:~:text=You%20can%20stake%20your%20NFTs Frank, J., & Silverstein, S.
(2019, February 13).
Vitalik Buterin created one of the world's largest cryptocurrencies in his early twenties—here's how he did it and why.
Business Insider.
https://www.businessinsider.in/vitalik-buterin-created-one-of-the-worlds-largest-cryptocurrencies-in-his-early-twenties-heres-how-he-did-it-and-why/articleshow/67978060.cms Frankenfield, J.
(2019a).
Consensus Mechanism (Cryptocurrency).
Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/consensus-mechanism-cryptocurrency.asp Frankenfield, J.
(2019b, May 5).
Cryptocurrency.
Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/cryptocurrency.asp Frankenfield, J.
(2021a, April 26).
Altcoin.
Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/altcoin.asp Frankenfield, J.
(2021b, June 4).
Ethereum.
Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/e/ethereum.asp Global X Blockchain ETF (BKCH).
(n.d.).
Global X ETFs.
https://www.globalxetfs.com/funds/bkch/ Greifeld, K.
(2021, October 21).
ProShares Bitcoin ETF tops $1 Billion assets in just 2 days.
Www.bloomberg.com.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-10-20/proshares-bitcoin-etf-tops-1-billion-in-assets-in-just-two-days Hayes, A.
(2021, August 26).
Is Ethereum more important than Bitcoin? Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/032216/ethereum-more-important-bitcoin.asp Hertig, A.
(2021, July 22).
How do Ethereum smart contracts work? Www.coindesk.com.
https://www.coindesk.com/learn/how-do-ethereum-smart-contracts-work/ Hung, J.
(2021, July 29).
Are NFTs just a fad Or here to stay? Www.linkedin.com.
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/nfts-just-fad-here-stay-jonathan-hung Iger, B.
(2021, June 4).
Cryptocurrency explained: How does Cryptocurrency work? Masterclass.com.
https://www.masterclass.com/articles/cryptocurrency-explained#how-does-cryptocurrency-work Jain, P.
(2020).
TechDay—Impact of blockchain technology on financial services.
Techdayhq.com.
https://techdayhq.com/community/articles/impact-of-block-chain-technology-on-financial-services Jegede, D.
O.
(2021, November 23).
10 altcoins to look out for in 2022.
Trend Online.
https://www.trend-online.com/cryptocurrency/altcoins-2022/ Jones, B.
(2018, October 5).
The cryptocurrency timeline.
ICS-Digital.
https://www.ics-digital.com/the-cryptocurrency-timeline/ Kameir, C.
(2020, February 18).
Council Post: Blockchain investment opportunity: Fiat money.
Forbes.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesfinancecouncil/2020/02/18/blockchain-investment-opportunity-fiat-money/?sh=341f59bd277d Kharpal, A.
(2021, April 6).
Cryptocurrency market value tops $2 trillion for the first time as ethereum hits record high.
CNBC.
https://www.cnbc.com/2021/04/06/cryptocurrency-market-cap-tops-2-trillion-for-the-first-time.html Lexology.
(2021, November 2).
Stablecoins: Latest disruption to traditional banking.
Lexology.
https://www.lexology.com/pro/insideview/stablecoins-latest-disruption-to-traditional-banking Leyes, K.
(2021, December).
3 ways to make money with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs).
Entrepreneur.
https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/368122 Liebkind, J.
(2021, October 30).
Beware of these five Bitcoin scams.
Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/forex/042315/beware-these-five-bitcoin-scams.asp Livni, E., & Lipton, E.
(2021, September 5).
Crypto banking and decentralized finance, explained.
The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/05/us/politics/cryptocurrency-explainer.html#:~:text=What%20is%20DeFi%3F Locke, T.
(2021, January 9).
Thinking of buying bitcoin? What experts say about big crypto concerns: "You have to be mentally prepared." CNBC.
https://www.cnbc.com/2021/01/09/what-experts-say-about-cryptocurrency-bitcoin-concerns.html Maring, J.
(2021, April 1).
How TikTok influencer & others lost money in "Mando" cryptocurrency scam.
ScreenRant.
https://screenrant.com/tiktok-mandalorian-cryptocurrency-scam-explained/ McWhinney, J.
(2019).
Can Bitcoin kill central banks? Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/050715/can-bitcoin-kill-central-banks.asp Michael.
(2020, November 27).
Plus Token (PLUS) scam—Anatomy of a Ponzi.
Boxmining.
https://boxmining.com/plus-token-ponzi/ Miller, H.
(2021, November 4).
New York takes on Miami; Square's Bitcoin revenue stumbles.
The Information.
https://www.theinformation.com/articles/new-york-takes-on-miami-square-s-bitcoin-revenue-stumbles MintDice.
(2019, September 26).
The psychology of cheap coins and why it's worth studying.
The Capital.
https://medium.com/the-capital/the-psychology-of-cheap-coins-and-why-its-worth-studying-14e1d1a2b3d8 Napoletano, E.
(2021, June 30).
Bitcoin IRA: How to invest for retirement with cryptocurrency.
Forbes Advisor.
https://www.forbes.com/advisor/retirement/bitcoin-ira/ Newton, C.
(2021, October 13).
How Axie Infinity is turning gaming on its head.
The Verge.
https://www.theverge.com/2021/10/13/22725083/axie-infinity-sky-mavis-blockchain-economy-game-pokemon Novak, M.
(2021, November 1).
Squid Game cryptocurrency scammers make off with $2.1 million.
Gizmodo.
https://gizmodo.com/squid-game-cryptocurrency-scammers-make-off-with-2-1-m-1847972824 Ohanian, A.
(2021, September 15).
Vitalik Buterin: The 100 most influential people of 2021.
Time.
https://time.com/collection/100-most-influential-people-2021/6095980/vitalik-buterin/ Parashar, R.
(2021, September 21).
What is Uniswap, and why is it useful? NDTV Gadgets 360.
https://gadgets.ndtv.com/cryptocurrency/features/what-is-uniswap-cryptocurrency-why-is-it-useful-2547964 Prasad, E.
(2021, May 24).
Five myths about cryptocurrency.
Brookings.
https://www.brookings.edu/opinions/five-myths-about-cryptocurrency/ Reiff, N.
(2020, January 21).
What Is the Grayscale Bitcoin Trust? Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/news/why-buy-expensive-bitcoin-etf-instead-actual-bitcoin/ Reiff, N.
(2021a, August 26).
Were there Cryptocurrencies before Bitcoin? Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/tech/were-there-cryptocurrencies-bitcoin/ Reiff, N.
(2021b, November 7).
Blockchain ETF.
Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/tech/how-blockchain-etfs-work/ Rodeck, D.
(2021a, March 26).
What is Ethereum and how does it work? Forbes Advisor.
https://www.forbes.com/advisor/investing/what-is-ethereum-ether/ Rodeck, D.
(2021b, November 16).
Cryptocurrency taxes 2021: What you need to know.
Forbes Advisor.
https://www.forbes.com/advisor/investing/cryptocurrency-taxes/ Royal, J., & Voigt, K.
(2021, December 3).
What Is Cryptocurrency? Beginners guide to digital cash.
NerdWallet.
https://www.nerdwallet.com/article/investing/cryptocurrency-7-things-to-know Schreier, J.
(2021, November 13).
Blockchain in gaming is all the rage for no good reason.
Www.bloomberg.com.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2021-11-12/crypto-in-video-games-is-all-the-rage-but-why Sergeenkov, A.
(2021, December 11).
5 ways to earn passive income from NFTs.
Www.coindesk.com.
https://www.coindesk.com/learn/5-ways-to-earn-passive-income-from-nfts/ Seth, S.
(2021).
Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC).
Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/central-bank-digital-currency-cbdc.asp Shaw, R.
(n.d.).
Blockchain key terms, explained.
KDnuggets.
https://www.kdnuggets.com/2017/11/blockchain-key-terms-explained.html Shetty, N.
(2021, May 19).
5 ways to smartly invest in Bitcoin.
Finextra Research.
https://www.finextra.com/blogposting/20333/5-ways-to-smartly-invest-in-bitcoin Sigalos, M.
(2021, August 10).
Coinbase profits surge following volatile stretch of cryptocurrency trading.
CNBC.
https://www.cnbc.com/2021/08/10/coinbase-coin-earnings-q2-2021.html Silvergate expands reach of Bitcoin collateralized U.S.
Dollar loans, announces Fidelity Digital Assets as Custody Provider.
(2021, March 29).
Www.businesswire.com.
https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20210329005050/en/Silvergate-Expands-Reach-of-Bitcoin-Collateralized-U.S.-Dollar-Loans-Announces-Fidelity-Digital-Assets-as-Custody-Provider Staff, B.
(2021, July 28).
Cryptocurrencies can never replace fiat money.
Blockonomist.
https://medium.com/blockonomist/cryptocurrencies-can-never-replace-fiat-money-52a0291b23da Stokel-Walker, C.
(2021, November 2).
How a Squid Game crypto scam got away with millions.
Wired.
https://www.wired.com/story/squid-game-coin-crypto-scam/ Sukhadeve, A.
(2021, November 20).
Top 10 Altcoins that are set to explode In 2022.
Analyticsinsight.net.
https://www.analyticsinsight.net/top-10-altcoins-that-are-set-to-explode-in-2022/ Telegraph.co.uk.
(2018, May 25).
Cryptocurrencies: a timeline.
The Telegraph.
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/digital-money/the-history-of-cryptocurrency/ Tepper, T.
(2021, February 26).
Coinbase IPO: Here's what you need to know.
Forbes.
https://www.forbes.com/advisor/investing/coinbase-ipo-direct-listing/ The Investopedia Team.
(2021, November 15).
Terra.
Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/terra-5209502 The ultimate guide to chainlink | What is LINK coin? (n.d.).
Cryptonews.com.
https://cryptonews.com/coins/chainlink/ Trails, B.
(n.d.).
Digital signatures in Blockchains: The present and future.
Bison Trails.
https://bisontrails.co/digital-signatures/ Van Boom, D.
(2021, April 13).
Forget Bitcoin: Inside the insane world of altcoin cryptocurrency trading.
CNET.
https://www.cnet.com/features/beyond-bitcoin-the-wild-world-of-altcoin-cryptocurrency-trading/ Ventures, F.
(2020, January 6).
What is Web 3.0 & why it matters.
Medium.
https://medium.com/fabric-ventures/what-is-web-3-0-why-it-matters-934eb07f3d2b Vermaak, W.
(2021, December 7).
What is Web 3.0? | CoinMarketCap.
Coinmarketcap.com.
https://coinmarketcap.com/alexandria/article/what-is-web-3-0 Voigt, K., & Rosen, A.
(2021, November 4).
What is Blockchain? The technology behind Cryptocurrency, explained.
NerdWallet.
https://www.nerdwallet.com/article/investing/blockchain Wangman, R.
(2021, November 2).
Crypto-backed loans don't require a credit check, but your collateral isn't immune to market swings.
Business Insider.
https://www.businessinsider.com/personal-finance/what-is-crypto-lending?IR=T Wathen, J.
(2018, January 19).
Amplify Transformational Data Sharing ETF: 3 things to know about this Blockchain ETF.
The Motley Fool.
https://www.fool.com/investing/2018/01/19/amplify-transformational-data-sharing-etf-3-things.aspx What is Bitcoin? (n.d.).
PCMAG.
https://www.pcmag.com/encyclopedia/term/bitcoin What is Hedera Hashgraph? (HBAR) | Kraken.
(n.d.).
Www.kraken.com.
https://www.kraken.com/en-us/learn/what-is-hedera-hashgraph-hbar Why Solana is the top-performing cryptocurrency of 2021.
(2021, September 7).
The Mail & Guardian.
https://mg.co.za/special-reports/2021-09-07-why-solana-is-the-top-performing-cryptocurrency-of-2021/#:~:text=What%20makes%20Solana%20unique%3F&text=Solana%20is%20built%20for%20speed Wikipedia.
(2021, July 20).
Axie Infinity.
Wikipedia.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axie_Infinity Williams, S.
(2018, January 2).
Cryptocurrencies explained, in plain English.
The Motley Fool; The Motley Fool.
https://www.fool.com/investing/2018/01/02/cryptocurrencies-explained-in-plain-english.aspx Woodley, K.
(2021, October 21).
Should you buy the ProShares Bitcoin Strategy ETF (BITO)? | Kiplinger.
Kiplinger.
https://www.kiplinger.com/investing/etfs/603621/proshares-bitcoin-strategy-etf-bito But cryptocurrencies are not backed by any public or private entities.
Therefore, it has been difficult to make a case for their legal status in different financial jurisdictions throughout the world.
It doesn't help matters that cryptocurrencies have largely functioned outside most existing financial infrastructure.
The legal status of cryptocurrencies has implications for their use in daily transactions and trading.
In June 2019, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) recommended that wire transfers of cryptocurrencies should be subject to the requirements of its Travel Rule, which requires AML compliance.5 As of December 2021, El Salvador was the only country in the world to allow Bitcoin as legal tender for monetary transactions.
In the rest of the world, cryptocurrency regulation varies by jurisdiction.
apan's Payment Services Act defines Bitcoin as legal property.6 Cryptocurrency exchanges operating in the country are subject to collect information about the customer and details relating to the wire transfer.
China has banned cryptocurrency exchanges and mining within its borders.
India was reported to be formulating a framework for cryptocurrencies in December.7 Cryptocurrencies are legal in the European Union.
Derivatives and other products that use cryptocurrencies will need to qualify as "financial instruments." In June 2021, the European Commission released the Markets in Crypto-Assets (MiCA) regulation that sets safeguards for regulation and establishes rules for companies or vendors providing financial services using cryptocurrencies.8 Within the United States, the biggest and most sophisticated financial market in the world, crypto derivatives such as Bitcoin futures are available on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has said that Bitcoin and Ethereum are not securities.
    Although cryptocurrencies are considered a form of money, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) treats them as a financial asset or property.
And, as with most other investments, if you reap capital gains in selling or trading cryptocurrencies, the government wants a piece of the profits.
On May 20, 2021, the U.S.
Department of the Treasury announced a proposal that would require taxpayers to report any cryptocurrency transaction of and above $10,000 to the IRS.9 How exactly the IRS would tax proceeds—as capital gains or ordinary income—depends on how long the taxpayer held the cryptocurrency.10  Advantages and Disadvantages of Cryptocurrency  Cryptocurrencies were introduced with the intent to revolutionize financial infrastructure.
As with every revolution, however, there are tradeoffs involved.
At the current stage of development for cryptocurrencies, there are many differences between the theoretical ideal of a decentralized system with cryptocurrencies and its practical implementation.
 Some advantages and disadvantages of cryptocurrencies are as follows.
 Advantages  •	Cryptocurrencies represent a new, decentralized paradigm for money.
In this system, centralized intermediaries, such as banks and monetary institutions, are not necessary to enforce trust and police transactions between two parties.
Thus, a system with cryptocurrencies eliminates the possibility of a single point of failure, such as a large bank, setting off a cascade of crises around the world, such as the one that was triggered in 2008 by the failure of institutions in the United States.
 •	Cryptocurrencies promise to make it easier to transfer funds directly between two parties, without the need for a trusted third party like a bank or a credit card company.
Such decentralized transfers are secured by the use of public keys and private keys and different forms of incentive systems, such as proof of work or proof of stake.11  •	Because they do not use third-party intermediaries, cryptocurrency transfers between two transacting parties are faster as compared to standard money transfers.
Flash loans in decentralized finance are a good example of such decentralized transfers.
These loans, which are processed without backing collateral, can be executed within seconds and are used in trading.12  •	Cryptocurrency investments can generate profits.
Cryptocurrency markets have skyrocketed in value over the past decade, at one point reaching almost $2 trillion.
As of May 2022, Bitcoin was valued at more than $550 billion in crypto markets.13  •	The remittance economy is testing one of cryptocurrency's most prominent use cases.
Currently, cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin serve as intermediate currencies to streamline money transfers across borders.
Thus, a fiat currency is converted to Bitcoin (or another cryptocurrency), transferred across borders and, subsequently, converted to the destination fiat currency.
This method streamlines the money transfer process and makes it cheaper.
 Disadvantages  •	Though they claim to be an anonymous form of transaction, cryptocurrencies are actually pseudonymous.
They leave a digital trail that agencies such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) can decipher.
This opens up possibilities of governments or federal authorities tracking the financial transactions of ordinary citizens.14  •	Cryptocurrencies have become a popular tool with criminals for nefarious activities such as money laundering and illicit purchases.
The case of Dread Pirate Roberts, who ran a marketplace to sell drugs on the dark web, is already well known.
Cryptocurrencies have also become a favorite of hackers who use them for ransomware activities.15  •	In theory, cryptocurrencies are meant to be decentralized, their wealth distributed between many parties on a blockchain.
In reality, ownership is highly concentrated.
For example, an MIT study found that just 11,000 investors held roughly 45% of Bitcoin's surging value.16  •	One of the conceits of cryptocurrencies is that anyone can mine them using a computer with an Internet connection.
However, mining popular cryptocurrencies requires considerable energy, sometimes as much energy as entire countries consume.
The expensive energy costs coupled with the unpredictability of mining have concentrated mining among large firms whose revenues running into the billions of dollars.
According to an MIT study, 10% of miners account for 90% of its mining capacity.16  •	Though cryptocurrency blockchains are highly secure, other crypto repositories, such as exchanges and wallets, can be hacked.
Many cryptocurrency exchanges and wallets have been hacked over the years, sometimes resulting in millions of dollars worth of "coins" stolen.17  •	Cryptocurrencies traded in public markets suffer from price volatility.
Bitcoin has experienced rapid surges and crashes in its value, climbing to as high as $17,738 in December 2017 before dropping to $7,575 in the following months.3 Some economists thus consider cryptocurrencies to be a short-lived fad or speculative bubble.
 $576 billion  Total market cap of Bitcoin, as of May 2022.
 How Do You Get Cryptocurrency?  Any investor can purchase cryptocurrency from popular crypto exchanges such as Coinbase, apps such as Cash App, or through brokers.
Another popular way to invest in cryptocurrencies is through financial derivatives, such as CME's Bitcoin futures, or through other instruments, such as Bitcoin trusts and Bitcoin ETFs.
 What Is the Point of Cryptocurrency?  Cryptocurrencies are a new paradigm for money.
Their promise is to streamline existing financial architecture to make it faster and cheaper.
Their technology and architecture decentralize existing monetary systems and make it possible for transacting parties to exchange value and money independently of intermediary institutions such as banks.
Can You Generate Cryptocurrency?  Cryptocurrencies are generated by mining.
For example, Bitcoin is generated using Bitcoin mining.
The process involves downloading software that contains a partial or full history of transactions that have occurred in its network.
Though anyone with a computer and an Internet connection can mine cryptocurrency, the energy- and resource-intensive nature of mining means that large firms dominate the industry.
What Are the Most Popular Cryptocurrencies?  Bitcoin is by far the most popular cryptocurrency followed by other cryptocurrencies such as Ethereum, Binance Coin, Solana, and Cardano.
Are Cryptocurrencies Securities?  The SEC has said that Bitcoin and Ethereum, the top two cryptocurrencies by market cap, are not securities.
It has not commented on the status of other cryptocurrencies.
Investing in cryptocurrencies and other initial coin offerings (“ICOs”) is highly risky and speculative, and this article is not a recommendation by Investopedia or the writer to invest in cryptocurrencies or other ICOs.
Because each individual's situation is unique, a qualified professional should always be consulted before making any financial decisions.
Investopedia makes no representations or warranties as to the accuracy or timeliness of the information contained herein.
The phone buzzed on the nightstand—once, twice, three times—waking Ankit Jain from what had been a restful sleep.
Before he could reach the phone, three more texts came through.
He knew who it would be: his boss, Thorsten Konig, the CEO of Ivory Tower, the world’s leading online education platform.
In Sun Valley talking crypto.
It’s time.
Payments + investment.
How fast can we do it?  Pls call ASAP to discuss.
Bring in Shira and Paul.
Ankit sighed.
Thorsten was a brilliant technologist who had started and sold DayTradz, one of the first online retail trading platforms, before he was even 30.
Ivory Tower was his second, also hugely successful, venture—one that was disrupting higher education by offering high-quality college and graduate-school courses to students around the world.
Some, such as the intro to economics class taught by a Nobel Prize winner donating his time, were extremely affordable, while others, such as classes on personal branding with Kris Jenner and on M&A with Carl Icahn, were obscenely expensive.
The idea was to have the platform’s wealthiest users subsidize its poorest.
The impact Ivory Tower had achieved in the five years since its launch—and in the 13 months since its IPO—was amazing.
But sometimes being the CFO of a fast-moving company led by a “crazy genius” was exhausting.
For months now Thorsten had been talking about integrating cryptocurrency into the business.
He was a huge proponent of Bitcoin1 and had put about 5% of his own portfolio into it.
Several weeks ago the CEO had asked Ankit to have his team look into accepting tuition payments and keeping some of Ivory Tower’s cash reserves in crypto.
In media interviews, Thorsten had also started alluding to “our crypto future,” sparking speculation that he would build or buy a crypto trading platform.2 But Ankit knew that Thorsten was committed to Ivory Tower for at least the next few years; he just wanted to combine it with his new passion.
To Thorsten, taking fees and making investments in Bitcoin were simple matters—akin to doing business in euros as well as dollars, which Ivory Tower already did.
Bitcoin adoption could allow the U.S.-based company to further hedge itself against dollar inflation.3  Ankit knew that things were much more complicated.
Although cryptocurrencies were gaining mainstream appeal, even established ones like Bitcoin were highly volatile, with value swings that made them look more like speculative stocks.
Sure, it was possible to take payment in Bitcoin and then convert it to dollars, but the company had to figure out whether it made sense to build the internal capability needed or to hire a third-party vendor to handle transactions.
And investing earnings in crypto was another thing entirely.
Ankit’s head hurt just thinking about the financial-reporting challenges.
Then there was his fiduciary responsibility as CFO: Did shareholders really want Ivory Tower to bet on crypto if doing so might risk the capital needed down the road for developing better technology and courses and expanding the company’s reach?  Unfortunately, Thorsten rarely took no for an answer.
So Ankit rolled out of bed and texted his teammates.
“Morning.
T asking about crypto again.
Zoom at 8 to discuss? He’ll join at 8:30.”  Within a minute, he’d received two thumbs up.
By now everyone was used to Thorsten’s impromptu meetings.
Ankit just hoped this one wouldn’t end with an edict.
Evaluating the Options  “I mean we can accept tuition payments in Bitcoin.” Paul Abebe, Ivory Tower’s controller, had jumped in immediately on the Zoom call.
Everyone had been working from home since the start of the pandemic, and the company had decided it wouldn’t require anyone to return to its Manhattan headquarters.
“It’s annoying—not as liquid as nondigital currencies, obviously.
There would be IRS reporting and anti-money-laundering compliance issues to consider.
But the question is: Why should we do it?”  “Thorsten says it fits with our ethos: embracing the future, spearheading new technologies, shaking up the stodgy educational community,” Shira Peretz, Ankit’s deputy, said.
“Edo loves the idea too.” She was referring to Edo Sanger, Ivory Tower’s CMO.
“He thinks it will make for great press.”  “And will that translate into more users and revenues?” Paul asked skeptically.
“What percentage of our students even care about this?”4  “Well, our blockchain and crypto courses are actually some of our most popular, but Thorsten admits that at this point most people probably won’t pay in Bitcoin,”5 Ankit said.
“He’s more interested in investing our excess cash in it.
Thoughts?”  “It’s a terrible idea,” Paul said.
“Agree,” Shira said.
“There’s no GAAP guidance on how to account for this stuff yet.6 But the AICPA says Bitcoin isn’t considered cash or a cash equivalent, inventory, or a financial instrument, so it needs to be treated like an intangible asset, which means that if its value falls, we have to mark it down on our balance sheet.
But if it goes up, we report those gains only when we sell.
So if we’re meaningfully invested, we could be taking big, random hits to our net income for no business-related reason.
Communicating the company’s performance will get more complicated.”  “But if Bitcoin goes up in the long run, could it give us gains that smooth out or boost profitability?” Ankit asked.
“Our shareholders aren’t looking for perfect quarterly results.
They want us to invest wisely to grow the company.”  “I’m sorry, but an asset that goes from a valuation of $60K to $30K in one month cannot be considered a prudent investment,” Paul countered.
“How do we know that Bitcoin will be worth as much next year as it is now? And will we use just Bitcoin or also Ether or any of the thousands of other cryptocurrencies?”  “For now, Thorsten’s talking only about Bitcoin,” Ankit said.
“It has the largest user base and longest history.
And he’s convinced it will go up in value.”  “If our shareholders want to bet on crypto, they can do it directly,” Paul said.
“When we filed our S-1 for the IPO, we didn’t say anything about a Bitcoin treasury.”  “Well, we’d disclose it, and investors could sell if they’re not on board,” Shira said.
Then she shook her head.
“But I agree that it’s too soon, too volatile.
I vote for accepting Bitcoin payments—if it’s doable without too much compliance and IT complications.
Investments, no.”  “I’m a no and a no,” Paul said.
 Just then, Ankit saw that Thorsten was in the Zoom waiting room.
“OK, guys, here comes T,” he said, letting the CEO in.
 “Hello, friends!” Thorsten said as his face popped up on-screen.
“What a fabulous day to be talking about the future.
Catch me up on our crypto plans.”  Ankit took the lead.
“We’ve evaluated our options, and while we appreciate the potential benefits of Bitcoin, we’re going to advise against—”  “Aha! I knew you guys would say this.
Your job is to worry about the spreadsheets.
I understand.
But that’s why I’m here: to help you see the big picture.
Bitcoin is the future.
There is no world in which it underperforms relative to major currencies over the next decade.7 We have so much cash in reserves.
Why wouldn’t we put some of it into assets that produce high returns we could invest in the company? We could get appreciation up to 10 times what we’d otherwise see.
We’ll help propel Bitcoin forward and democratize the movement of money, just as we’re democratizing education.
We must do this!”  Ankit could tell that Paul and Shira were deflated, if not surprised.
This did seem like a fait accompli.
What Thorsten wanted, Thorsten usually got.
 The Board’s Concerns  After setting his team to work figuring out how to take crypto payments and spending a few hours modeling various levels of investment in Bitcoin, Ankit checked his email.
Cindy Yu, the company’s newest director and the head of its audit committee, had sent a message asking him to call her.
 “Cindy, hi! I just saw your message.
What’s up?”  “Hi, Ankit.
Thanks for getting back to me.
I’m calling with some board concerns.
Can we speak off the record?”  “Of course.”  “Thorsten has mentioned to several directors that he’s interested in making Bitcoin a bigger part of Ivory Tower’s business.
At the same time, he’s personally—and not insignificantly—invested in Bitcoin.
Some of us are worried that this at least has the appearance of a conflict of interest.” 8  “I see.”  “More important, some of us have questions about the wisdom of taking our treasury into crypto.
Obviously, I expect that we’ll discuss this at the board meeting next week, but I wanted to give you a heads-up.
I suspect that Thorsten has asked you to present a plan to us.
However, we want your candid opinion.
He has his allies, of course.
But as nonexecutive directors, we have to make decisions in the company’s best interest, and we expect the finance team to make recommendations based on the same criteria.”  “Of course.”  “I know Thorsten is a force of nature and doesn’t make it easy to disagree with him.9 But if you do, the board needs to hear it, and you will have our support.”  Case Study Classroom Notes  Bitcoin is the first cryptocurrency, created in 2009.
Users on its network can send Bitcoins to one another ...
 Pressure from the CEO  At 7, Ankit was out for a jog when his phone rang: Thorsten.
 “Ankit.
Hope I didn’t catch you at a bad time.
I wanted to reconnect on crypto.”  “Just on a run.
No problem.”  “Ah, keep running.
I can talk as you go,” Thorsten said.
“I want you to know that I understand your hesitancy.
And we can take it slow.
But I have a track record of knowing what’s next in business.
First DayTradz, now Ivory Tower—both big successes, though many didn’t believe they could be.
You can trust me again now.
Bitcoin has outperformed the dollar since its inception, is gaining popularity with our user base, and in my opinion will be more efficient and secure than regular currencies.
Other cutting-edge companies are already starting to jump in.
Now is the time for us to as well.
Our support will help the crypto movement.
We’ll take power from large institutions and put it into the hands of the people.
This fits perfectly with our mission.”  Ankit wasn’t sure how to reply, but Thorsten didn’t press any further.
“OK, continue your exercise, my friend.
And tomorrow we’ll run toward the future together!”  After the call, Ankit picked up his pace and tried unsuccessfully to zone out to his iPhone music.
Was Thorsten right? If monetary exchange was going to move toward crypto, Ivory Tower should certainly get ahead of the shift.
But what if governments clamped down on cryptocurrency? If Bitcoin lost all its value? The board members were right to ask hard questions.
And Ankit wasn’t at all sure how to answer them.
 The Experts Respond: Should Ankit back Thorsten’s Bitcoin plans or not?     Amrita Ahuja is the CFO of Square.
 Ankit should support the push into Bitcoin—as both an accepted form of payment and an investment on the balance sheet.
At Square we believe there’s a high probability that the internet will have its own native cryptocurrency, and Bitcoin is the strongest contender.
It’s the most secure and resilient, with a principled, decentralized, transparent, and consensus-based development model.
We foresee a future in which companies won’t have to navigate fiat currencies and local rules and regulations that create complexity and high costs for consumer transactions across borders.
Cost, time, and security inefficiencies will fall away, and companies that accept Bitcoin payments will be able to serve anyone in the world, including people who have historically been marginalized by financial systems or who distrust federal banks (as in Latin America and certain other regions).
This fits perfectly with Ivory Tower’s mission of bringing quality higher education to underserved communities globally, and the company should get ahead of the game.
 Thorsten’s also right that having Bitcoin on the balance sheet will demonstrate to customers, employees (present and future), shareholders, and onlookers that it has “skin in the game” and will help make a more inclusive internet currency a reality.
In addition, Bitcoin can provide attractive diversification and act as an inflation hedge.
 Square invested 5% of its cash and cash equivalents in Bitcoin.
We believe that the long-term opportunity is worth any near-term volatility and that our investment will enable us to learn and help improve the system while increasing trust in it.
To that end, Square has set up the Crypto Open Patent Alliance to increase access to cryptotechnology through a collaborative patent library; Square Crypto, an independent team solely focused on contributing to the Bitcoin open-source work; a $10 million Bitcoin clean-energy initiative to incentivize miners to use renewable sources; and a $5 million endowment to fund education about Bitcoin and promote its adoption.
Ivory Tower could similarly be at the leading edge of network development, building good relationships with regulators to enable consumer protection and address bad actors while also fostering innovation and figuring out how to master custody, insurance, exchange, accounting, payroll, tax reporting, and compliance.
 Ankit, of course, needs to address all the concerns that his team and Cindy Yu have raised.
But with Thorsten’s support and a clear strategy and execution plan, he can make the case that the company has the opportunity to be at the forefront of this rapidly emerging trend.
This is the time for him to truly lead as CFO.
    Roxi Wen is the CFO of Invitae.
 The case against Ivory Tower’s moving to accept and hold Bitcoin is far stronger than the one for it.
Ankit should oppose the plan—but only after having a frank conversation with Thorsten to outline the downsides and explore other ideas.
 Paul is right that cryptocurrency is too volatile to be of balance-sheet quality.
If Ivory Tower wants an inflation hedge, many alternatives—gold and real estate, for example—are less risky.
Moreover, managing Bitcoin transactions and custody will require the finance department to build entirely new capabilities, such as safe storage for Bitcoin keys, and it’s unclear that that would be a good use of staff time.
And the regulatory environment is extremely uncertain; difficult disclosure rules or divestment requirements could crop up at any time.
 I also find it hard to believe people will want to pay tuition in Bitcoin.
Most buyers of crypto want to hold it for capital appreciation and as an inflation hedge, just like Thorsten.
Why would customers use their holdings to pay for courses, logging taxable capital gains now?  Thorsten thinks Bitcoin will be more secure and efficient than currencies backed by governments.
But that’s debatable, since fiat payments, particularly in developed countries, move securely and often more rapidly than Bitcoin blocks do.
 Sure, Bitcoin may someday trade as frequently and easily as dollars, euros, and yen.
Ivory Tower might get useful marketing value from being ahead of the curve and solidifying its reputation as a forward-looking innovator.
However, given the complexities surrounding Bitcoin, I think there are more-effective ways to gain competitive advantage.
 Ankit needs to artfully manage Thorsten.
When you work with a smart, fast-moving leader who is full of ideas, you often feel your job is to constantly say no.
But that’s not a productive relationship.
Instead, you want to have candid strategic conversations.
 The two men should talk about what Thorsten really wants.
Is it to embrace Bitcoin? Or to become part of the blockchain revolution? And if it’s the latter, is there another way to deploy the technology in the business? For example, could it be used to set up an open, distributed operating system where users could create their own classes? Could payment collection happen via blockchain even when customers pay in traditional currencies? These are much broader questions, and Thorsten’s answers might help Ankit find a way to honor the CEO’s wishes without doing exactly as he says.
 At my company my colleagues have lots of ideas about what to do with our significant cash reserves, but no matter how wild their suggestions are, I never just reject them.
I sit down with people, ask what they’re trying to accomplish, and brainstorm how to achieve those goals even if it’s in ways different from what they’ve suggested.
Ankit should do the same with Thorsten.
 Of course, the CEO could put his foot down and persuade the board to back him.
Elon Musk was able to do that with Bitcoin investments at Tesla.
But even then, Ankit could pitch a lower-risk experiment—perhaps creating a small, separate holding company to test Bitcoin in.
 The CFO has authority and credibility with Thorsten and the board.
He shouldn’t be afraid to use it.
 HBR’s fictionalized case studies present problems faced by leaders in real companies and offer solutions from experts.
This one is based on the HBS Case Study “Accounting for Bitcoin at Tesla” (case no.
121074-PDF-ENG ), by Charles C.Y.
Wang and Siyu Zhang.
 Every problem that we have in society has a suite of relative solutions that are also business opportunities.
   Agricultural waste is a problem.
But solving that problem is a business opportunity.
Energy inefficiency is a problem.
But solving that problem is a business opportunity.
The abusive treatment of animals is a problem.
But solving that problem is a business opportunity.
Reduced biodiversity is a problem.
But solving that problem is a business opportunity.
Plastic waste in the ocean is a problem.
But solving that problem is a business opportunity.
And the list goes on indefinitely.
We just have to think creatively and fluidly and we can solve all of these problems that plague Earth and we can grow businesses and earn money and provide for our families in the process.”  ― Hendrith Vanlon Smith Jr, CEO of Mayflower-Plymouth  tags: business, business-advice, circular-economy, cryptocurrency, nft, permaculture-economy  23 likes  Like      “The key to having a permaculture economy is ensuring that the waste from every one is a resource for another.
   When every ones waste is a resource for another, interesting truths emerge - no waste exists in the system as a whole, resources become abundant and easily accessible, businesses become generally more profitable, and wealth becomes more widely distributed.
This is a circular economy.
This is a permaculture economy.”  ― Hendrith Vanlon Smith Jr, CEO of Mayflower-Plymouth  tags: business, business-advice, business-growth-and-success, circular-economy, cryptocurrency, nft, permaculture, permaculture-economy, systems-thinking  21 likes  Like      “A dysfunctional society is bad for business.
If the society you live in is wasteful or destructive or non-inclusive or inefficient....
It's more difficult to manage a business, and there are less business opportunities available.
So every entrepreneur should be concerned about social dynamics and broader society.”  ― Hendrith Vanlon Smith Jr, CEO of Mayflower-Plymouth  tags: business, business-advice, circular-economy, cryptocurrency, nft, permaculture-economy  17 likes  Like      “At Mayflower-Plymouth, we are trying to mimic the intelligence of fungi and mycelium to add value in service to businesses.”  ― Hendrith Vanlon Smith Jr, CEO of Mayflower-Plymouth  tags: blockchain, blockchain-technology, cryptocurrency, fungi, logistics, mycelium-networks, mycology, mycorrhizae, supply-chain-management  14 likes  Like      “When a business utilizes resources wisely, it becomes better able to widen the margins between revenues and expenses.”  ― Hendrith Vanlon Smith Jr  tags: amazon, apple, business, circular-economy, cryptocurrency, maersk, nft, resourcefulness, revenue-growth, toyota  6 likes  Like      “When new things emerge in our world, its best to put some time into researching them and trying to gain an understanding.
With that understanding, you're then able to think about and plan for the new business applications for those things and the new ways in which your business may profit from them.”  ― Hendrith Vanlon Smith Jr  tags: bing, business, business-quotes, cryptocurrency, economy, google, metaverse, nft, research  5 likes  Like         “If The Dollar represents financialization, and The Dollar is dying, and we are moving towards currencies being backed by commodities, then The Future is REAL.
BearPaw Duck And Meme Farm Coin is backed by duck eggs.”  ― Jarod Kintz, Ducks are the stars of the karaoke bird world  tags: cryptocurrency, currency, dollar, duck, duck-eggs, duck-quote, duck-quotes, ducks, meme-coin, money  2 likes  Like      “Trust me, I get it - there is so much to absorb in the crypto space, but I'm here to help you along the way.”  ― Najah Roberts  tags: bitcoin, crypto-quotes, cryptocurrency, finance-quotes, success-in-business, wealth-accumulation, wealth-building, wealth-creation, wealth-management, wealth-quotes  1 likes  Like      “Web3 is about free choice and democracy”  ― Gun Gun Febrianza  tags: bitcoin, blockchain, crypto, cryptocurrency, democracy, ethereum, web3, web3-0  1 likes  Like      “Fake money established by centralized power.”  ― Gun Gun Febrianza  tags: bitcoin, blockchain, cryptocurrency, money, power  0 likes  Like      “Fiat is the ultimate of shitcoin.”  ― Gun Gun Febrianza  tags: bitcoin, blockchain, cryptocurrency, fiat, money, shitcoin  0 likes  Like      “Money is a network of perception, in order to not become useless this perception need to be distributed.”  ― Gun Gun Febrianza  tags: bitcoin, blockchain, cryptocurrency, money, network, perception  0 likes  Like      “Money manipulation is the root of all evil, you can manipulate fiat but you cant manipulate bitcoin.”  ― Gun Gun Febrianza  tags: bitcoin, blockchain, cryptocurrency, evil, fiat, money  0 likes  Like      “There is only Bitcoin maximalist and the rest is Shitcoin maximalist.
Stop create another maxi.”  ― Gun Gun Febrianza  tags: bitcoin, cryptocurrency, money, shitcoin  0 likes  Like      “Bitcoin will become collateral asset on banking system for cash loan.”  ― Gun Gun Febrianza  tags: bank, banking, bitcoin, blockchain, cash, collateral-asset, cryptocurrency, defi, loan  0 likes  Like      “Bitcoin eliminate all money exploiter”  ― Gun Gun Febrianza  tags: bank, banking, bitcoin, blockchain, cheat, cryptocurrency, defi, exploit, fiat, money  0 likes  Like      “A smooth sea never produced a Skilled Sailor.”  ― Najah Roberts  tags: business-leaders, business-success, cryptocurrency, determination-of-greatness, determination-quotes, finances, motivation-quotes, motivational-quotes, resilience-quotes, women-in-business  0 likes  Like      “I'm in the business of helping families understand money, 401(k)’s, Annuities, and Life Insurance.”  ― Najah Roberts  tags: business-quotes, business-success, cryptocurrency, cryptocurrency-quotes, currency-quotes, finance-quotes, financial-education, financial-freedom, money-quote, money-quotes  0 likes  Like      “The wealth gap is so big and so wide that something short of a miracle has to happen to get families of color where they need to be.”  ― Najah Roberts  tags: bitcoin-quotes, cryptocurrency, generation-quotes, money-quotations, money-quote, money-quotes, money-talks, wealth-creation, wealth-quotes, wealth-strategies  0 likes  Like      “Success is built on the backbone, NOT a wishbone.”  ― Najah Roberts  tags: bitcoin-quotes, cryptocurrency, money-quote, money-quotes, success-in-business, success-quotes, successful-people, successful-people-quotes, successful-women-quotes  0 likes  Like      “To Crypto or Not to Crypto that is the Question that leads to demise.”  ― Najah Roberts  tags: bitcoin-quote, bitcoin-quotes, crypto-quotes, cryptocurrency, cryptocurrency-quotes, financial-literacy, money-management, money-quote, money-quotes, wealth-quotes  0 likes  Like      “Bitcoin is a central study in the Political Economy of Global Security as it influences Global Governance.”  ― Gun Gun Febrianza  tags: bitcoin, blockchain, cryptocurrency, economics, economy, governance, politics  0 likes  Like      “Investing in Crypto is like being married, you have to keep going through the good and the bad, for better or for worse, for richer or for poorer TIL death do us part.
HODL”  ― Najah Roberts  tags: bitcoin, bitcoin-quotes, crypto-currencies, crypto-quotes, cryptocurrencies, cryptocurrency, wealth-creation, wealth-quotes  0 likes  Like      “Crypto with passion or not at all.”  ― Najah Roberts  tags: bitcoin-cash, bitcoin-quotes, crypto-quotes, cryptocurrencies, cryptocurrency, cryptocurrency-quotes, wealth-quotes  0 likes  Like         “You are scared centralized exchanges like Coinbase and Binance can take your assets if they go bankrupt.
Do you know your bank can do the same thing, right?”  ― Olawale Daniel  tags: assets, bankrupt, binance, blockchain, coinbase, cryptocurrency, defi, exchanges, private-key, tradfi  0 likes  Like         “Everybody will get a bite of Bitcoin at a price they deserve.
There's no need to rush.”  ― Olawale Daniel  tags: adoption, bitcoin, blockchain, cryptocurrency, finance, government, money  0 likes  Like         “No matter the line of business you are into, if the currency you are dealing with is being hit as hard as the Nigerian naira, you will never be happy.
That is more reason to vote for, and install leaders with an in-depth understanding of moving all spheres of the economy forward.”  ― Olawale Daniel  tags: business, cryptocurrency, currency, ease-of-doing-business, economic-growth, finance, inflation, naira, nigerian-government, poverty  0 likes  Like      “Everything will be tokenized, blockchain will become fundamental building blocks of value exchange.”  ― Gun Gun Febrianza  tags: bitcoin, blockchain, cryptocurrency, tokenization, tokenomics  0 likes  Like      “Bitcoin is extraordinary asset class, initialized by demand shock, driven by formidable philosophy”  ― Gun Gun Febrianza  tags: asset-digital, bitcoin, blockchain, cryptocurrency, economy  0 likes  Like         “Bitcoin is sovereign wealth while everything else is conditional wealth because you are not in charge of anything.”  ― Olawale Daniel    rypto is a lot of things – including terribly explained.
We’re here to clear things up.
 Until fairly recently, if you lived anywhere other than San Francisco, it was possible to go days or even weeks without hearing about cryptocurrency.
 Now, suddenly, it’s inescapable.
Look one way, and there are Matt Damon and Larry David doing ads for crypto start-ups.
Swivel your head — oh, hey, it’s the mayors of Miami and New York City, arguing over who loves Bitcoin more.
Two N.B.A.
arenas are now named after crypto companies, and it seems as if every corporate marketing team in America has jumped on the NFT — or nonfungible token — bandwagon.
(Can I interest you in one of Pepsi’s new “Mic Drop” genesis NFTs? Or maybe something from Applebee’s “Metaverse Meals” NFT collection, inspired by the restaurant chain’s “iconic” menu items?)  Crypto! For years, it seemed like the kind of fleeting tech trend most people could safely ignore, like hoverboards or Google Glass.
But its power, both economic and cultural, has become too big to overlook.
Twenty percent of American adults, and 36 percent of millennials, own cryptocurrency, according to a recent Morning Consult survey.
Coinbase, the crypto trading app, has landed on top of the App Store’s top charts at least twice in the past year.
Today, the crypto market is valued at around $1.75 trillion — roughly the size of Google.
And in Silicon Valley, engineers and executives are bolting from cushy jobs in droves to join the crypto gold rush.
 As it’s gone mainstream, crypto has inspired an unusually polarized discourse.
Its biggest fans think it’s saving the world, while its biggest skeptics are convinced it’s all a scam — an environment-killing speculative bubble orchestrated by grifters and sold to greedy dupes, which will probably crash the economy when it bursts.
 I’ve been writing about crypto for nearly a decade, a period in which my own views have whipsawed between extreme skepticism and cautious optimism.
These days, I usually describe myself as a crypto moderate, although I admit that may be a cop-out.
 I agree with the skeptics that much of the crypto market consists of overvalued, overhyped and possibly fraudulent assets, and I am unmoved by the most utopian sentiments shared by pro-crypto zealots (such as the claim by Jack Dorsey, the former Twitter chief, that Bitcoin will usher in world peace).
 But as I’ve experimented more with crypto — including accidentally selling an NFT for more than $500,000 in a charity auction last year — I’ve come to accept that it isn’t all a cynical money-grab, and that there are things of actual substance being built.
I’ve also learned, in my career as a tech journalist, that when so much money, energy and talent flows toward a new thing, it’s generally a good idea to pay attention, regardless of your views on the thing itself.
 My strongest-held belief about crypto, though, is that it is terribly explained.
 Recently, I spent several months reading everything I could about crypto.
But I found that most beginner’s guides took the form of boring podcasts, thinly researched YouTube videos and blog posts written by hopelessly biased investors.
Many anti-crypto takes, on the other hand, were undercut by inaccuracies and outdated arguments, such as the assertion that crypto is good for criminals, notwithstanding the growing evidence that crypto’s traceable ledgers make it a poor fit for illicit activity.
 What I couldn’t find was a sober, dispassionate explanation of what crypto actually is — how it works, who it’s for, what’s at stake, where the battle lines are drawn — along with answers to some of the most common questions it raises.
 This guide — a mega-F.A.Q., really — is an attempt to fix that.
In it, I’ll explain the basic concepts as clearly as I can, doing my best to answer the questions a curious but open-minded skeptic might pose.
 Crypto boosters will likely quibble with my explanations, while dug-in opponents may find them too generous.
That’s OK.
My goal is not to convince you that crypto is good or bad, that it should be outlawed or celebrated, or that investing in it will make you rich or bankrupt you.
It is simply to demystify things a bit.
And if you want to go deeper, each section has a list of reading suggestions at the end.
 CRYPTO WILL BE TRANSFORMATIVE  Understanding crypto now — especially if you’re naturally skeptical — is important for a few reasons.
 The first is that crypto wealth and ideology is going to be a transformative force in our society in the coming years.
 You’ve heard about the overnight Dogecoin millionaires and Lamborghini-driving Bitcoin bros.
But that’s not the half of it.
The crypto boom has generated vast new fortunes at a clip we’ve never seen before — the closest comparison is probably the discovery of oil in the Middle East — and has turned its biggest winners into some of the richest people in the world, essentially overnight.
Some riches could vanish if the market crashes, but enough has already been cashed out to ensure that crypto’s influence will linger for decades.
 Crypto’s madcap, meme-crazed online culture can make it seem frivolous and shallow.
It’s not.
Cryptocurrencies, even the jokey ones, are part of a robust, well-funded ideological movement that has serious implications for our political and economic future.
Bitcoin, which emerged out of the ashes of the 2008 financial crisis, first caught on among libertarians and anti-establishment activists who saw it as the cornerstone of a new, incorruptible monetary system.
Since then, other crypto realms have fashioned similarly lofty goals, like building a decentralized, largely unregulated version of Wall Street on the blockchain.
 We are already starting to see a swell of crypto money headed toward the U.S.
political system.
Crypto entrepreneurs are donating millions of dollars to candidates and causes, and lobbying firms have fanned out across the country to win support for pro-crypto legislation.
In the coming years, crypto moguls will bankroll the campaigns of crypto-friendly candidates, or run for office themselves.
Some will peddle influence in the familiar ways — forming super PACs, funding think tanks, etc.
— while others will try to escape partisan gridlock altogether.
(Crypto millionaires are already buying up land in the South Pacific to build their own blockchain utopias.)  Crypto is poised to soon become one of a handful of true wedge issues, with politicians all over the world forced to pick a side.
Some countries, like El Salvador — whose crypto-loving president, Nayib Bukele, recently announced the development of a “Bitcoin City” at the base of a volcano — will go full crypto.
Other governments may decide that crypto is a threat to their sovereignty and crack down, as China did when it outlawed cryptocurrency trading last year.
The divide between the world’s pro-crypto and no-crypto zones could end up being at least as big as the divide between the Chinese internet and the American one, and maybe even more consequential.
 In America, we have already seen how crypto can scramble the usual partisan allegiances.
Former President Donald J.
Trump and Senator Elizabeth Warren, the Democrat from Massachusetts, are united in crypto skepticism, for example, while Senator Ted Cruz, Republican from Texas, is in the same bullish camp as Senator Ron Wyden, the Democrat from Oregon.
We have also seen what can happen when the crypto community feels politically threatened, as happened last summer, when crypto groups rallied to oppose a crypto-related provision in President Biden’s infrastructure bill.
 What I’m saying, I guess, is that despite the goofy veneer, crypto is not just another weird internet phenomenon.
It’s an organized technological movement, armed with powerful tools and hordes of wealthy true believers, whose goal is nothing less than a total economic and political revolution.
 CRYPTO COULD BE DESTRUCTIVE  The second reason to pay attention to crypto is that understanding it now is the best way to ensure it doesn’t become a destructive force later.
 In the early 2010s, the most common knock on social media apps like Facebook and Twitter was that they just wouldn’t work as businesses.
Pundits predicted that users would eventually tire of their friends’ vacation photos, that advertisers would flee and that the whole social media industry would collapse.
The theory wasn’t so much that social media was dangerous or bad; just that it was boring and corny, a hype-driven fad that would disappear as quickly as it had arrived.
 What nobody was asking back then — at least not loudly — were questions like: What if social media is actually insanely successful? What kind of regulations would need to exist in a world where Facebook and Twitter were the dominant communication platforms? How should tech companies with billions of users weigh the trade-offs between free speech and safety? What product features could prevent online hate and misinformation from cascading into offline violence?  By the middle of the decade, when it was clear that these were urgent questions, it was too late.
The platform mechanics and ad-based business models were already baked in, and skeptics — who might have steered these apps in a better direction, if they’d taken them more seriously from the start — were stuck trying to contain the damage.
 Are we making the same mistake with crypto today? It’s possible.
No one knows yet whether crypto will or won’t “work,” in the grandest sense.
(Anyone who claims they do is selling something.) But there is real money and energy in it, and many tech veterans I’ve spoken to tell me that today’s crypto scene feels, to them, like 2010 all over again — with tech disrupting money this time, instead of media.
 If they’re wrong, they’re wrong.
But if they’re right — even partly — the best time to start paying attention is now, before the paths are set and the problems are intractable.
 The third reason to study up on crypto is that it can be genuinely fun to learn about.
 Sure, a lot of it is dumb, shady or self-refuting.
But if you can look past the carnival barkers and parse the convoluted jargon, you’ll find a bottomless well of weird, interesting and thought-provoking projects.
The crypto agenda is so huge and multidisciplinary — drawing together elements of economics, engineering, philosophy, law, art, energy policy and more — that it offers lots of footholds for beginners.
Want to discuss the influence of Austrian economics in Bitcoin development? There’s probably a Discord server for that.
Want to join a DAO that invests in NFTs, or play a video game that pays you in crypto tokens for winning? Dive right in.
 CRYPTO IS A GENERATIONAL SKELETON KEY  Mind you, I am not suggesting that the crypto world is diverse, in the demographic sense.
Surveys have suggested that high-earning white men make up a large share of crypto owners, and libertarians with dog-eared copies of “Atlas Shrugged” are likely overrepresented among crypto millionaires.
But it’s not an intellectual monolith.
There are right-wing Bitcoin maximalists who believe that crypto will liberate them from government tyranny; left-wing Ethereum fans who want to overthrow the big banks; and speculators with no ideological attachments who just want to turn a profit and get out.
These communities fight with one another constantly, and many have wildly different ideas about what crypto should be.
It makes for fascinating study, especially with a bit of emotional distance.
 And if you do learn some crypto basics, you might find that a whole world opens up to you.
You’ll understand why Jimmy Fallon and Steph Curry are changing their Twitter avatars to cartoon apes, and why Elon Musk, the richest man in the world, spent a decent chunk of last year tweeting about a digital currency named after a dog.
Strange words and phrases you encounter on the internet — rug pulls, flippenings, “gm” — will become familiar, and eventually, headlines like “NFT Collector Sells People’s Fursonas for $100K In Right-Click Mindset War” won’t make you wonder if you’re losing your grip on reality.
 Crypto can also be a kind of generational skeleton key — maybe the single fastest way to freshen your cultural awareness and decipher the beliefs and actions of today’s young people.
And just as knowing a little about New Age mysticism and psychedelics would help someone trying to make sense of youth culture in the 1960s, knowing some crypto basics can help someone perplexed by emerging attitudes about money and power feel more grounded.
 Again, I don’t really care whether you emerge from these explainers as a true believer, a devoted skeptic or something in between.
Participate or abstain as you wish! All I’m after is understanding — and possibly, a little relief from the question that has consumed my social and professional life for the past several years:  “So … can I ask you a question about crypto?”  Let’s start from the beginning: What is crypto?  A decade or two ago, the word was generally used as shorthand for cryptography.
But in recent years, it’s been more closely associated with cryptocurrencies.
These days, “crypto” usually refers to the entire universe of technologies that involve blockchains — the distributed ledger systems that power digital currencies like Bitcoin, but also serve as the base layer of technology for things like NFTs, web3 applications and DeFi trading protocols.
 Ah yes, blockchains.
Can you remind me, without going into too much technical detail, what they are?  At a very basic level, blockchains are shared databases that store and verify information in a cryptographically secure way.
 You can think of a blockchain like a Google spreadsheet, except that instead of being hosted on Google’s servers, blockchains are maintained by a network of computers all over the world.
These computers (sometimes called miners or validators) are responsible for storing their own copies of the database, adding and verifying new entries, and securing the database against hackers.
 So blockchains are … fancy Google spreadsheets?  Sort of! But there are at least three important conceptual differences.
 First, a blockchain is decentralized.
It doesn’t need a company like Google overseeing it.
All of that work is done by the computers on the network, using what’s called a consensus mechanism — basically, a complicated algorithm that allows them to agree on what’s in a database without the need for a neutral referee.
This makes blockchains more secure than traditional record-keeping systems, proponents believe, since no single person or company can take down the blockchain or alter its contents, and anyone trying to hack or change the records in the ledger would need to break into many computers simultaneously.
 The second major feature of blockchains is that they’re typically public and open source, meaning that unlike a Google spreadsheet, anyone can inspect a public blockchain’s code or see a record of any transaction.
(There are private blockchains, but they’re less important than the public ones.)  Third, blockchains are typically append-only and permanent, meaning that unlike with a Google spreadsheet, data that’s added to a blockchain typically can’t be deleted or changed after the fact.
 Got it.
So blockchains are public, permanent databases that nobody owns?  You’re getting it!  Now remind me: How are blockchains related to cryptocurrencies?  Blockchains didn’t really exist until 2009, when a pseudonymous programmer named Satoshi Nakamoto released the technical documentation for Bitcoin, the first-ever cryptocurrency.
 Bitcoin used a blockchain to keep track of transactions.
That was notable because, for the first time, it allowed people to send and receive money over the internet without needing to involve a central authority, such as a bank or an app like PayPal or Venmo.
 Many blockchains still perform cryptocurrency transactions, and there are now roughly 10,000 different cryptocurrencies in existence, according to CoinMarketCap.
But many blockchains can be used to store other kinds of information, too — including NFTs, bits of self-executing code known as smart contracts and full-fledged apps — without the need for a central authority.
 OK, but can we back up a second? Weren’t tech people telling us, years ago, that crypto was a new and exciting form of money? And yet, nobody I know pays their rent or buys groceries in Bitcoin.
So were those people just … wrong?  Good question.
It’s true that today, hardly anyone pays for things in cryptocurrency.
In part, that’s because most merchants still don’t accept crypto payments, and hefty transaction fees can make it impractical to spend small amounts of cryptocurrency on daily living expenses.
It’s also because the value of popular cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and Ether has historically gone up, making it somewhat risky to use them for offline purchases.
(The counterexamples are usually cited with pity, like the guy who, in 2010, bought two Papa John’s pizzas using Bitcoin that was worth about $40 at the time, but would be worth roughly $400 million today.)  It’s also true that the value of cryptocurrencies has grown enormously since the early Bitcoin days, despite them not being most people’s daily spending money.
 Part of that growth is speculation — people buying crypto assets in hopes of selling them for more later on.
Part of it is because the blockchains that have emerged since Bitcoin, like Ethereum and Solana, have expanded what can be done with this technology.
 And some crypto fans believe that the prices of cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin will eventually stabilize, which could make them more useful as a means of payment.
 What are the actual uses of crypto, beyond financial speculation?  Right now, many of the successful applications for crypto technology are in finance or finance-adjacent fields.
For example, people are using crypto to send cross-border remittances to family members abroad and Wall Street banks using blockchains to settle foreign transactions.
 The crypto boom has also led to an explosion of experiments outside of financial services.
There are crypto social clubs, crypto video games, crypto restaurants and even crypto-powered wireless networks.
 These non-financial uses are still fairly limited.
But crypto fans often make the case that the technology is still young, and that it took the internet decades to mature into what it is today.
Investors are pouring billions of dollars into crypto start-ups because they think that someday, blockchains will be used for all kinds of things: storing medical records, tracking streaming music rights, even hosting new social media platforms.
And the crypto ecosystem is attracting tons of developers — an auspicious sign for any new technology.
 I’ve heard people calling crypto a pyramid scheme or a Ponzi scheme.
What do they mean?  Some critics believe that cryptocurrency markets are fundamentally fraudulent, either because early investors get rich at the expense of late investors (a pyramid scheme), or because crypto projects lure in unsuspecting investors with promises of safe returns, then collapse once new money stops coming in (a Ponzi scheme).
 There are certainly plenty of examples of pyramid and Ponzi schemes within crypto.
They include OneCoin, a fraudulent crypto operation that stole $4 billion from investors from 2014 to 2019; and Virgil Sigma Fund, a $90 million crypto hedge fund run by a 24-year-old investor who pleaded guilty to securities fraud and was sentenced to seven and a half years in prison.
 But these cases aren’t usually what critics are talking about.
They’re generally arguing that crypto itself is an exploitative scheme, with no real-world value.
 And are they right?  Well, let’s try to understand the case they’re making.
 Unlike buying stock in, say, Apple, a purchase that (theoretically, at least) reflects a belief that Apple’s underlying business is healthy, buying a cryptocurrency is more like betting on the success of an idea, they say.
If people believe in Bitcoin, they buy, and Bitcoin prices go up.
If people stop believing in Bitcoin, they sell, and Bitcoin prices go down.
 Crypto owners, then, have a rational incentive to convince other people to buy.
And if you don’t think that cryptocurrency technology is inherently valuable, you might conclude that the entire thing resembles a pyramid scheme, in which you primarily make money by recruiting others to join.
 I’m sensing a “but” coming on.
 But! Even though there are scams and frauds within crypto, and crypto investors are certainly fond of trying to recruit other people to buy in, many investors will tell you that they are going in with their eyes wide open.
 They believe that crypto technology is inherently valuable, and that the ability to store information and value on a decentralized blockchain will be attractive to all kinds of people and businesses in the future.
They would tell you they’re betting on crypto the product, not crypto the idea — which, on some level, isn’t all that different from buying Apple stock because you think the next iPhone is going to be popular.
 Matt Huang, a prominent investor, spoke for many crypto fans when he said on Twitter: “Crypto may look like a speculative casino from the outside.
But that distracts many from the deeper truth: the casino is a trojan horse with a new financial system hidden inside.”  You can argue with that position, or dispute how much this “new financial system” is actually worth.
But crypto investors clearly believe it’s worth something.
 Is crypto regulated?  Only slightly.
In the United States, certain centralized crypto exchanges, such as Coinbase, are required to register as money transmitters and follow laws like the Bank Secrecy Act, which requires them to collect certain information about their customers.
Some countries have passed more stringent regulations, and others, like China, have banned cryptocurrency trading entirely.
 But compared with the traditional financial system, crypto is very lightly regulated.
There are few rules governing crypto assets like “stablecoins” — coins whose value is pegged to government-backed currencies — or even clear guidance from the Internal Revenue Service about how certain crypto investments should be taxed.
And certain areas of crypto, like DeFi (decentralized finance), are almost completely unregulated.
 Partly, that’s because it’s still early, and making new rules takes time.
But it’s also a property of blockchain technology itself, much of which was designed to be hard for governments to control.
 This question comes from the (apparently crypto-curious) rapper Cardi B: Is crypto going to replace the dollar?  Sorry, Cardi.
The dollar is the world’s reserve currency, and dislodging it would be a huge, costly project that isn’t likely to happen any time soon.
(To give just one small example of the enormity of the task: every financial contract that is denominated in dollars would have to be re-denominated in Bitcoin or Ether or some other cryptocurrency.)  There are also technical hurdles crypto needs to overcome if it’s ever going to displace government-issued currency.
Today, the most popular blockchains — Bitcoin and Ethereum — are slow and inefficient compared with traditional payment networks.
(The Ethereum blockchain, for example, can process only about 15 transactions per second, whereas Visa says it can process thousands of credit card transactions per second.)  And, of course, for a cryptocurrency like Bitcoin to replace the dollar, you’d need to convince billions of people to use a currency whose value fluctuates wildly, that isn’t backed by a government and that often can’t be retrieved if it’s stolen.
 What kind of people are investing in crypto? Is it all — to quote a recent “Curb Your Enthusiasm” episode — “nerds and Nazis”?  It’s hard to say who’s investing in crypto, especially since a lot of activity takes place anonymously or under pseudonyms.
But some surveys and studies have suggested that crypto is still dominated by affluent white men.
 Gemini, a cryptocurrency exchange, estimated in a recent report that women made up only 26 percent of crypto investors.
The average crypto owner, the group found, was a 38-year-old man making approximately $111,000 a year.
 But crypto ownership does appear to be diversifying.
A 2021 Pew Research Center survey found that Asian, Black and Latino adults were more likely to have used crypto than white adults.
Crypto adoption is also growing outside the United States, and some studies have suggested that crypto adoption is growing fastest in countries like Vietnam, India and Pakistan.
 My colleague, Tressie McMillan Cottom, has made the case that crypto — because it relies on permanent, irrefutable records of ownership of digital goods and currencies — is particularly attractive to people from marginalized groups, who may have had their property unjustly taken from them in the past.
 “If I live in a community where the police absolutely use eminent domain to claim my private property and I cannot do anything about it,” she wrote, “that sense of everyday powerlessness would make the promise of blockchain sound pretty good.”  That said, some recent studies have also found that a small number of people own the vast majority of crypto wealth — so it’s not necessarily an egalitarian paradise.
 And what about extremists? Are they into crypto?  Some are.
Because you can buy and sell cryptocurrency without using your name or having a bank account, crypto in its early days was a natural fit for people who had reasons to avoid the traditional financial system.
They included criminals, tax evaders and people buying and selling illicit goods.
They also included political dissidents and extremists, some of whom had been kicked off more mainstream payment services like PayPal and Patreon.
 As a result of their well-timed entry into the crypto market, some extremists have gotten rich.
A recent investigation by the Southern Poverty Law Center found that several prominent white supremacists have made hundreds of thousands or millions of dollars by investing in crypto.
 Of course, there are millions of crypto owners, the vast majority of whom are not white supremacists.
And the same properties of anonymity and censorship-resistance that make crypto useful to white supremacists might also make it attractive to, say, Afghan citizens fleeing the Taliban.
So labeling the entire crypto movement an extremist group would be overkill.
Regardless, it’s safe to say that crypto has become attractive to all kinds of people who would rather not deal (or can’t legally deal) with a traditional bank.
 Another criticism I’ve heard is that crypto is bad for the environment.
Is that true?  This is a real can of worms — and one of the most frequent objections to crypto.
 Let’s start with what we know for sure.
It’s true that most crypto activity today takes place on blockchains that require large amounts of energy to store and verify transactions.
These networks use a “proof-of-work” consensus mechanism — a process that has been compared to a global guessing game, played by computers all competing to solve cryptographic puzzles in order to add new information to the database and earn a reward in return.
Solving these puzzles requires powerful computers, which in turn use lots of energy.
 The Bitcoin blockchain, for example, uses an estimated 200 terawatt-hours of energy per year, according to Digiconomist, a website that tracks crypto energy usage.
That’s comparable to the annual energy consumption of Thailand.
And Bitcoin’s associated carbon emissions have been estimated at roughly 100 megatons per year, which is comparable to the carbon footprint of the Czech Republic.
 Holy moly! How do crypto fans justify that kind of environmental impact?  Crypto advocates often quibble with these statistics.
They also argue that:  • Our existing financial system also uses a lot of energy, between powering millions of bank branches, A.T.M.s that sit idle for most of the day, gold mines and other energy-intensive infrastructure.
 • Many crypto-mining computers are already powered by renewable energy sources, or by energy that would otherwise be wasted.
 • Most newer blockchains are built using consensus mechanisms that require much less energy than proof-of-work.
(Ethereum, for example, is scheduled to switch to a new type of consensus mechanism called proof-of-stake sometime in 2022, which could reduce its energy usage by as much as 99.5 percent.)  And are those arguments valid?  Partly.
It’s true that most newer blockchains are designed in a way that requires considerably less energy than Bitcoin, and that Ethereum’s switch to a proof-of-stake consensus mechanism will greatly shrink its environmental footprint, if and when it happens.
 But it’s also a bit convenient to steer attention away from Bitcoin, which is still the most valuable cryptocurrency in the world.
Bitcoin’s energy needs aren’t expected to fall significantly anytime soon.
And even if every Bitcoin miner ran entirely on renewable energy — which, to be clear, isn’t the case — there would still be an environmental cost associated with maintaining the blockchain.
 All told, it’s clear that crypto as we know it today has a significant environmental impact, but it’s hard to measure exactly how significant.
Many frequently cited statistics come from industry groups, and it’s hard to find trustworthy, independent data and analysis.
 But few crypto fans would dispute that blockchains consume substantially more energy than a traditional, centralized database would — just as 100 refrigerators use more energy than one refrigerator.
They just argue that crypto’s environmental impact will shrink over time, and that the benefits of decentralization are worth the costs.
 Got it.
And those benefits, again, are …  Some crypto proponents will tell you that the biggest benefit of decentralization is the ability to create currencies, apps and virtual economies that are resistant to censorship and top-down control.
(Imagine a version of Facebook, they’ll say, in which Mark Zuckerberg couldn’t unilaterally decide to kick people off.)  Others will say that the biggest perk of decentralization is that it allows artists and creators to control their own economic destinies more directly by giving them a way (in the form of NFTs and other crypto assets) to bypass platform gatekeepers like YouTube and Spotify, and sell unique digital works directly to their fans.
 Still others will say that crypto is most useful to people who don’t live in countries with stable currencies, or to dissident groups living under authoritarian regimes.
 There are a million other hypothetical benefits of decentralization and crypto, some of which are realistic and some of which probably aren’t.
 How do you actually use crypto? Is it like sending a payment over Paypal or Venmo?  It can be.
The quickest way to get started using cryptocurrencies is to set up an account with a crypto exchange like Coinbase, which can link to your bank account and convert your U.S.
dollars (or other government-issued currency) into cryptocurrency.
 But many crypto users prefer setting up their own “wallets” — secure places to store the cryptographic keys that unlock their digital assets.
 Once you’ve got some crypto in your wallet, the process can be pretty simple — just type in the recipient’s crypto wallet address, pay a transaction fee (if applicable), and wait for the payment to clear.
 Other types of crypto transactions, like buying and selling NFTs, can be significantly more complicated, but the basic act of sending a payment to someone typically takes only a few minutes.
 I’m ready to dive into the rest of your explainers.
But first, I have one final question about crypto’s culture: Why is it so weird and insular?  This is maybe the question I get asked most about crypto.
People see their friends, co-workers and relatives diving down the crypto rabbit hole and emerging days or weeks later with a new obsession, new internet friends, a bunch of new jargon and the seeming inability to talk about anything else.
(There’s even a word for this — getting “cryptopilled.”) People who believe in crypto tend to really believe in it — to the point that they can appear to the outside world more like evangelists for a new religion than fans of a new technology.
 I was a religion reporter once, and I don’t think the comparison is totally inapt.
(It’s also not necessarily a bad thing: Plenty of people find meaning and community and intellectual stimulation in religion.) As people like the Bloomberg journalist Joe Weisenthal have pointed out, crypto has similar elements to an emerging religion: an enigmatic founder (the still-anonymous Satoshi Nakamoto), sacred texts (the Bitcoin white paper) and rituals and rites to mark yourself as a believer, such as tweeting “gm” (crypto speak for “good morning”) to your fellow believers, or photoshopping laser eyes onto your profile picture.
 It’s fun to laugh at the (often cringeworthy) ways crypto fans try to entertain and inspire each other.
But focusing too much on their behavior and customs might mean missing what’s genuinely novel — and, depending on where you sit, either exciting or dangerous — about the technology itself.
Which is why, when my friends ask me how to talk to their cryptopilled relatives, I advise them to start by trying to understand what’s gotten them so excited in the first place.
                             Go deeper:  “WTF Is the Blockchain?” In this basic explainer of blockchain technology, Mohit Mamoria looks into how blockchains work and the problems they’re intended to solve.
 “Introduction to Blockchain and Money” This YouTube video, which explains the history and technical underpinnings of crypto, is the first lecture in a course taught at M.I.T.
in 2018 by Gary Gensler, who is now the chief of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
(The rest of the course is also on YouTube, and makes for interesting viewing.)  “A Normie’s Guide to Becoming a Crypto Person” This New York Magazine article by Sara Harrison is a 101-level guide to crypto culture, including a glossary of terms and explanations of the many crypto subcommunities.
 “Digital Gold” Nathaniel Popper, my former Times colleague, offers a deep dive into the history of Bitcoin and the origins of the crypto economy in his 2015 book.
     HODL.
DApp.
Ethereum.
 No, these are not words from a newly-discovered alien language.
They’re among the many new and key terms in the language of cryptocurrency.
 Cryptocurrency isn’t just a novel investment option, and in many ways represents a different world altogether compared to traditional stocks and bonds.
Between unfamiliar acronyms, emerging technologies, and keeping up with memes and tweets, just learning the basics takes time, even for seasoned traditional investors.
 As with any investment, it’s important to understand exactly what you’re investing in before you start.
That’s especially true when it comes to a speculative — and still evolving — asset like crypto.
  There are a few prerequisites we recommend before you buy into crypto, like stocking your emergency fund, paying down high-interest debts, and securing a traditional retirement plan.
And, like we’ve said before, you should only ever put into crypto what you’re willing to lose, and experts recommend dedicating no more than 5% of your portfolio to these digital assets.
  But another item you should add to your checklist is at least a beginner’s understanding of what you’re getting into, including how crypto differs from other investment strategies, and the different factors that can affect a cryptocurrency’s market value.
 Here are some of the terms and phrases that will help beginners better understand the world of crypto investing.
  RELATED: Top Crypto News This Week  Crypto Terms You Should Know  Altcoin  An altcoin is any coin that’s not Bitcoin.
Altcoins can be anything from the second-most popular coin, Ethereum, to any of the thousands of coins with very minimal market value.
Experts say you should largely stick to the bigger, more mainstream cryptocurrencies as an investment.
[RELATED]: Follow These Personal Finance Experts if You’re Curious About Crypto  Bitcoin  The first and most valuable cryptocurrency, launched on Jan.
3, 2009.
While its value has climbed steadily since then, it has seen wild fluctuations.
In the past months alone, the price of Bitcoin has fluctuated from a record high of $60,000 to below $30,000.
 Bitcoin Cash  A peer-to-peer electronic cash system that formed from a fork of the original Bitcoin.
Where Bitcoin is widely accepted as too volatile to be useful as a currency, Bitcoin Cash is designed to be better optimized for transactions.
[RELATED]: Bitcoin — The First Cryptocurrency  Block  Groups of data within a blockchain.
On cryptocurrency blockchains, blocks are made up of transaction records as users buy or sell coins.
Each block can hold only a certain amount of information.
Once it reaches that limit, a new block is formed to continue the chain.
 Blockchain  A digital form of record keeping, and the underlying technology behind cryptocurrencies.
A blockchain is the result of sequential blocks that build upon one another, creating a permanent and unchangeable ledger of transactions (or other data).
 Coin  A representative store of digital value that lives on a given blockchain or cryptocurrency network.
Some blockchains have the same name for both the network and the coin, like Bitcoin.
Others can have different names for each, like the Stellar blockchain, which has a native coin called Lumen.
Coinbase  A popular centralized cryptocurrency exchange.
Coinbase made history recently as the first cryptocurrency exchange to go public on the Nasdaq.
Cold Wallet/Cold Storage  A secure method of storing your cryptocurrency completely offline.
Many cold wallets (also called hardware wallets) are physical devices that look similar to a USB drive.
This kind of wallet can help protect your crypto from hacking and theft, though it also comes with its own risks – like losing it, along with your crypto.
[RELATED] A Crypto Wallet Can Help Keep Your Coins Safe.
Here’s How to Decide if You Need One   Cryptocurrency  A type of currency that’s digital and decentralized.
Cryptocurrency can be used to buy and sell things, or as a long-term store of value.
Decentralization  The principle of distributing power away from a central point.
Blockchains are traditionally decentralized because they require majority approval from all users to operate and make changes, rather than a central authority.
Decentralized Finance (DeFi)  Financial activities conducted without the involvement of an intermediary, like a bank, government, or other financial institution.
Decentralized Applications (DApps)  Applications designed by developers and deployed on a blockchain to carry out actions without intermediaries.
Decentralized finance activities are often completed using decentralized apps.
Ethereum is the main network supporting activities in decentralized finance.
Digital Gold  Experts sometimes compare specific cryptocurrencies to real gold based on the way it can store and increase in value.
Bitcoin is commonly referred to as digital gold.
Ethereum  The second largest cryptocurrency by trade volume, Ethereum is a crypto network and software platform that developers can use to create new applications, and has an associated currency called ether.
Exchange  A cryptocurrency exchange is a digital marketplace where you can buy and sell cryptocurrency.
Fork  When a blockchain’s users make changes to its rules.
These changes to the protocol of a blockchain often result in two new paths — one that follows the old rules, and a new blockchain that splits off from the previous one.
(Example: a fork of Bitcoin resulted in Bitcoin Cash).
Gas  A fee that developers have to pay to the Ethereum network in order to use the system.
Gas is paid in ether, the native cryptocurrency of Ethereum.
Genesis Block  The first block of a cryptocurrency ever mined.
HODL  Stands for “Hold On for Dear Life” though the term originated from a user typo on a Bitcoin forum in 2013.
It refers to a passive investment strategy in which people buy and hold onto cryptocurrency — instead of trading it — in the hopes that it increases in value.
[RELATED]: The Price of Bitcoin Continues to Fall.
Here’s How Worried Investors Should Be, According to Experts  Halving  A feature written into Bitcoin’s code in which after a certain number of blocks are mined (typically every four years) the amount of new Bitcoin entering circulation gets halved.
The halving can have an impact on Bitcoin’s price.
Hash  A unique string of numbers and letters that identify blocks and are tied to crypto buyers and sellers.
Hot Wallet  A software-based cryptocurrency wallet connected to the Internet.
While more convenient for quickly accessing your crypto, these wallets are a bit more susceptible to hacking and cybersecurity attacks than offline wallets — just as files you store in the cloud may be more easily hacked than those locked in a safe in your home.
Initial Coin Offering (ICO)  A way that funds are raised for a new cryptocurrency project.
ICOs are similar to Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) of stocks.
Market Capitalization  Cryptocurrency market capitalization refers to the total value of all the coins that have been mined.
You can calculate a crypto’s market cap by multiplying the current number of coins by the current value of the coins.
Mining  The process whereby new cryptocurrency coins are made available and the log of transactions between users is maintained.
Node  A computer that connects to a blockchain network.
Non-fungible Tokens (NFTs)  Non-fungible tokens are units of value used to represent the ownership of unique digital items like art or collectibles.
NFTs are most often held on the Ethereum blockchain.
[RELATED] Ethereum: What You Should Know Before You Invest  Peer-to-peer  Two users interacting directly without a third party or intermediary.
Public Key   Your wallet’s address, which is similar to your bank account number.
You can share your public wallet key with people or institutions so they can send you money or take money from your account when you authorize it.
Private Key  The encrypted code that allows direct access to your cryptocurrency.
Like your bank account password, you should never share your private key.
Satoshi Nakomoto  The pseudonymous creator of Bitcoin.
No one knows the true identity of Nakomoto — or if it’s more than one person.
Smart Contract  An algorithmic program that enacts the terms of a contract automatically based on its code.
One of the main value propositions of the Ethereum network is its ability to execute smart contracts.
Stablecoin or Digital Fiat  A stablecoin pegs its value to some other non-digital currency or commodity.
A digital fiat represents a fiat, or government-backed currency on the blockchain.
(Example: Tether, which is pegged to the U.S.
dollar)  [RELATED]: The 10 Most Popular Cryptocurrencies, and What You Should Know About Each Before You Invest  Token  A unit of value on a blockchain that usually has some other value proposition besides just a transfer of value (like a coin).
Vitalik Buterin  Programmer who invented Ethereum in 2015.
Wallet  A place to store your cryptocurrency holdings.
Many exchanges offer digital wallets.
Wallets may be hot (online, software-based) or cold (offline, usually on a device).
Why people ♥ this e-book 🙋 Trusted by millions of traders all over the globe.
💸 Our students have gone from struggling to earn a dollar, to making thousands.
📚 Bored of guides teaching you unnecessary trading theory? We break trading down into manageable sections, applicable to the real world.
🕵 The authors of this guide have a combined 10+ years in the cryptocurrency space 💪 We use real-world examples to help give your learning context.
These include China’s crypto ban, Elon Musk’s Doge tweets, and many more.
TRY CRYPTO trading RISK FREE💸 Download HERE or Scan this QR Code Download HERE or Scan this QR Code 👇 👇 👇 TRADING GAME Bitcoin flip Start with $100 With crypto still very much in its infancy, you don’t need a lot of money to make it big! A small investment of just $100 could be worth $1000s by the same time next year, provided that you take the time to learn and choose the right investments.
Small initial investment lowers both the risk and the barrier of entry, for the benefit of a larger potential gain than any other market.
More Volatility If you’re investing in stocks, a 5% price change can send the market into a frenzy! However, with cryptocurrencies, it’s common to see a 50% price increase overnight - giving you the potential to profit big with just 1 trade! Keep in mind, the increased volatility Profit In Both Directions You might think a coin has to rise in value to make money, well this isn’t the case.
Regardless of a coin’s performance, you can continue earning by opening up a short position This enables you to profit from both rising and falling prices.
You’re moments away from learning how to do it! The Crypto Market Never Sleeps Unlike stocks, the cryptocurrency market never closes! This means wherever you are in the world, you can earn a second income by trading in your spare time; all from the comfort of your bed! What’s not to love? Leverage Trading After you’ve got a bit of experience, you can try your hand at leveraged trading.
This lets you earn up to 100x more than you usually would, meaning a trade that would’ve only netted you $5, could earn you $500.
Keep in mind - risks increase because leverage also amplifies your losses.
Why trade cryptocurrencies? I DONT HAVE TIME TO WATCH CHARTS ALL DAY 😢🤷 With copy trading, you're letting someone else do the hard hours for you.
Of course, in return they earn rewards for their profitable trading.
So they are happy to do this.
💛 👱#1 CHOOSE A TRADER 👱 💸 #2 SET AN AMOUNT 💸 🤝 #3 CLICK COPY 🤝 Check their performance, assets, risk score, and more.
Check out our dynamic list with TOP traders HERE Choose a total amount for the copy — the proportions are calculated automatically Click the “Copy” button to start automatically copying the trader’s positions.
eToro is a multi-asset platform which offers both investing in stocks and cryptoassets, as well as trading CFDs.
Please note that CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money rapidly due to leverage.
67% of retail investor accounts lose money when trading CFDs with this provider.
You should consider whether you understand how CFDs work, and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.
TRY copytrading Although the word cryptocurrency is often thrown around as a blanket statement to describe any token operating on the Blockchain, in reality, there are several subdivisions.
Understanding the differences between these crypto-assets can help you take your trading to the next level, it opens you up to the deeper world of crypto, allowing you to earn interest on your investments, play Blockchain games, and send transactions for pennies.
Have a look at the graphic below, after reading it you’ll understand the different types of crypto and how you can use them to your advantage.
what are cryptoassets what is the blockchain On the surface Blockchain technology seems impossible to understand, with any definition typically accompanied by a load of jargon.
However, if we take a step back and look at Blockchain technology in simple terms, it becomes far easier to grasp.
The Blockchain is a database that gets distributed to every computer on the network, instead of connecting to a central server.
This is advantageous because it makes the Blockchain near-impossible to take down.
The database contains the data from every transaction that takes place on a network, every time a new transaction occurs it gets added to the database.
These lists of transactions are separated into manageable “blocks”, which each contain a transaction timestamp and a link to the previous block.
Because each block has to be validated by every computer on the network, it makes it impossible to falsify a transaction, resulting in a tamper-proof ledger containing every transaction to ever take place.
Improve your crypto language 😱 FUD = Fear, Uncertainty & Doubt.
😭 FOMO = Fear Of Missing Out.
💪 HODL = Hold on For Dear life.
🌕 MOONING = Price Going Up High.
💪 FIAT = Government Issued Currency.
🐳 WHALE = Someone with A Lot Of Crypto.
🐂 BULLISH = Expecting the Price Go Up.
🐻 BEARISH = Expecting the Price Go Down.
🍴 FORK = When An Existing Blockhain splits into two seperate blockhains.
🏙 ICO = Initial Coin Offering.
A Type of Crowdfunding.
🚀 ATH = All Time High.
The Highest Price That The Coin Has Reached.
💸 ALTCOIN = Alternative Cryptocurrencies Launched After Bitcoin.
🏎 WHEN LAMBO? = Used When Wondering When An Asset Will Cost Enough To Buy a Lamborghini.
🕵 PUMP & DUMP = A Scheme For A Manipulative Price Increase Followed By A Collapse.
Why is Bitcoin So Volatile? Up 15% today, down 10% tomorrow.
Bitcoin volatility is one of the scariest things a cryptocurrency trader can experience.
Bitcoin volatility 👉What causes the price of Bitcoin to fluctuate? Well, a lot of it has to do with the uncertainty surrounding Bitcoin's future.
As a new technology, Bitcoin is yet to prove itself, the problems it aims to solve are big and there’s not a whole lot of real-world data to say definitively if Bitcoin can solve them.
👉 Because nobody can predict the future of BItcoin, investors get easily swayed.
a negative news story releases and people think Bitcoin is dead, a billionaire tweets his support and the price shoots sky-high.
👉 Should you be concerned about Bitcoin’s fluctuations? Although it’s true volatility can be scary, when used correctly it allows you to take your trading game to the next level.
Is the volatility of Bitcoin good or bad for trading? While it’s true Bitcoin is becoming more and more accepted as a form of currency, the market is still fiercely volatile.
Of course, this isn’t ideal for Bitcoins use case as a store of value (although as you can see from the graphic above, the price is only increasing) but for traders, a bit of volatility can be the perfect storm.
Picture for a second two traders - one trades cryptocurrency and the other Forex.
The person trading cryptocurrency is subject to extreme volatility but because of this doesn't need to have much capital and doesn’t need to use leverage.
On the other hand, because prices only change by a fraction of a penny, the person trading Forex needs to use far greater leverage or requires a huge amount of capital.
While neither person is wrong, the person trading cryptocurrency has the potential to see a far greater return on investment.
Is Bitcoin doomed to be volatile forever? At the end of the day, cryptocurrency is still young.
Until a ceiling is found volatility is par for the course, as such you should attempt to embrace volatility rather than fight against it.
It’s impossible to say when Bitcoin will stabilise, but until that happens we recommend taking advantage of this once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.
Rome wasn’t built in a day, so why would a new global standard currency? Only time will tell where Bitcoin ends up but the longer it’s actively used and the more decentralised it becomes, the more likely it is that it will find its footing.
Until that happens we recommend you take advantage of this volatility and use it to accumulate wealth.
how to read crypto charts #2 LINE CHART A line chart is the simplest and most basic type of stock chart used to analyze crypto market.
A line chart shows the direction of the cryptocurrency closing price.
This quickly gives the crypto-chart reader a view of the price trend.
Identifying trends, whether they are moving up, down or across and also knowing when they are about to reverse is really key to your Crypto trading.
No matter what asset you are trading, you need to know how to follow charts.
#1 BAR CHART A bar chart helps you to identify the prevailing trend and to time the entry and exit of your trades.
#2 CANDLESTICK CHART Candlestick charts are used by traders to determine possible price movement based on past patterns.
Candlesticks are useful when trading as they show four price points (open, close, high, and low) throughout the period of time the trader specifies.
what is a bull or bear market A bull market describes the constant rising of a crypto market.
Per definition,the market generally increases by at least 20%.
A bear market describes the constant falling of a crypto market.
Per definition, the market generally decreases by at least 20%.
When you open a BUY POSITION, you are said to be BULLISH.
When you open a SELL POSITION, you are said to be BEARISH.
BULLISH CANDLE BEARISH CANDLE BULLISH TREND BEARISH TREND how to read a candlestick chart One of the most important things you need to learn before delving deeper into the world of cryptocurrency trading is how to read a candlestick chart.
When compared to a line chart or something similar, a candlestick chart provides you with a much clearer insight into how the market is performing, making it a key tool in any trader's arsenal.
If you take a look at the image below, we can see it highlights the differences between a bearish and bullish candle and shows you how to successfully interpret candlestick movements.
*eToro is a multi-asset platform which offers both investing in stocks and cryptoassets, as well as trading CFDs.
Please note that CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money rapidly due to leverage.
67% of retail investor accounts lose money when trading CFDs with this provider.
You should consider whether you understand how CFDs work, and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.
**The minimum first deposit is $50 forclients from Austria, Germany, Netherlands, Norway, Italy, United Kingdom, Ireland, Spain, Sweden, USA.
Elsewhere it starts from $200.
*** Plus500 offers only CFD on Forex.
72% of retail investor accounts lose money when trading CFDs with this provider.
Plus500UK LTD authorised & regulater by the FCA (#509909).
Plus500CY LTD authorised & regulated by CYSEC (#250/14) What moves crypto market? There’s a lot of volatility in the cryptocurrency market, however, it’s rarely without reason.
Once you begin to understand what causes these wild swings, you’re well on your way to becoming an expert trader! To help you better understand some of the contributing factors, we’ve broken the main ones below.
#1 Supply and demand Supply and demand has a huge influence on the price of pretty much everything in the modern world, cryptocurrency is no exception to this rule.
📰 The vast majority of cryptocurrencies have a finite supply, meaning ifsomething were to drive up demand, the price will shortly follow.
It can be hard to notice an uptick in demand, but you can make it far easier by following media coverage.
🐶 Take, for example, Dogecoin, a small project that was essentially a joke, but somehow ended up making investors millions! You might be asking yourself “how’s that even possible? Well, when Elon Musk tweeted about Dogecoin, showing he believed in it, investors could only come to one logical conclusion - if the richest man in the world thinks it’s a good investment, I should probably invest too.
☝Following this, there was a huge increase in demand for Dogecoin, causing the price to rise, generating further publicity, resulting in a snowball effect.
#2 Bad Press 📺 Because cryptocurrency is still in its infancy, any bad press can have a catastrophic effect on price.
Unfortunately, once negative news has been released it’s usually too late to take action, instead, we recommend taking a “buy the rumor, sell the news” approach.
💸 By doing this, you can capitalize on both negative and positive news, alowing you to make money no matter the condition of the market! * A great example of this is China banning cryptocurrency.
The average peson may look at this headline and start panicking, but by following this strategy you would’ve primed yourself to make thousands! Instead of selling out of fear, you would’ve heard about this news and started researching, by doing so you would see this isn’t the first time China has “banned” cryptocurrency.
🛒 With this knowledge in hand, you could’ve strategically sold your positions and bought back in for far cheaper, generating huge profits as the price starts to stabilize.
#3 Integration 👱As a relatively new technology, many people are looking at cryptocurrencywith wide eyes, wondering what it will end up amounting to.
This depends massively on something called institutional adoption, which involves large companies like Amazon integrating crypto technology into their platforms.
🚀In a similar way to Musk and Dogecoin, this shows that a large company, with deep pockets, believes in cryptocurrency, often causing an upward trend in price.
🤳In July earlier this year (2021), there was a rumor circulating about Amazon starting to accept crypto payments, as you could imagine, this sent social media into a frenzy.
As this story began to do the rounds, it caused wild speculation about the future of Bitcoin and cryptocurrency in general, with many believing other companies, were soon to follow.
☝Although this story was later confirmed to be false by Amazon, the price of Bitcoin shot up drastically rising from $34,400 to over $40,000, an increase of over 15%.
#4 Key Events ⚠Cryptocurrency is an emerging financial market with the unprecedented potential to put wealth back in the hands of the people.
As such, any issues with regulations or security can send shockwaves throughout the entire industry - at the end of the day, nobody wants to see their hard-earned investment disappear due to something like a security issue.
💣Because of this just the rumor of regulatory issues, or a security exploit,can be devastating for the market as a whole.
In June 2016, Etheruem released a new feature and was beginning to gain traction, however, an exploit was found and an Ethereum DAO’s funds (essentially a decentralized corporation) started getting drained at a rate of $8 million an hour, all the way to the tune of $55 million.
📉Not a bad day for the hacker I’m sure, but for Ethereum it was devastating, many began to lose trust in the network and almost 50% was whipped off the price instantly.
Crypto Trading strategies Do you want to trade like a pro? Then you’re going to need to learn about a few sure-fire trading strategies.
Following a trading strategy helps to minimize risk and maximize profits! Find one that works for you and stick to it! #1 Day Trading 💸 Do you want to make a full-time living from cryptocurrency? Then daytrading might be the strategy for you! You can use this method to make huge profits by taking advantage of small price changes.
Simply, buy a coin and sell it once it’s risen or fallen by a small amount, a quick turnover time massively reduces risk.
Seems simple right? 📌 Well, as you might have guessed without a large pile of cash to invest, you wouldn’t make much money if Bitcoin, for example, rose by a couple of hundred dollars.
Here’s where leverage comes in handy, it allows you to magnify your profits up to 100x.
This means you still make hundreds if not thousands from tiny increases and decreases in price.
However, it’s crucial to only trade using leverage once you have experience because it also amplifies your losses.
#2 Trend Trading 📈 Trend trading takes advantage of swings in the market, by watching the charts you can identify upward or downward trends.
You should note, it’s almost impossible to buy right at the bottom or to sell at the peak, this is because before a movement in price begins, there is nothing for you to base your trade on.
🙋 It can be rather hard to find which cryptos will start rising or falling, but not for our readers! We’ll clue you into this expert strategy for identifying trends in the market.
Just have a look at the top gainers and losers and try to find out if you’re at the start, middle, or end of a trend.
As long as the trend isn’t about to end, you can make some money! ⚠As the saying goes, with risk comes reward.
But understandably, not everyone is comfortable risking large sums of money, this is where a strategy like hedging can be beneficial.
Instead of putting all of your eggs in one basket, spread them out, this negates a lot of the risk involved with trading.
⚒This approach does require a bit more work than the other strategies we’ve mentioned because you need to analyze how likely it would be for the price to rise and fall and set up trades accordingly.
💪For example, if you think a trade has a high chance of going your way, bet more on the positive outcome and reduce your position on the negative.
If you think it’s likely your trade will go south, do the opposite.
#3 Hedging Strategy #4 HODL Strategy 👉Probably the simplest strategy we’ve spoken about, and oftentimes themost profitable, HODLing (holding), involves buying and simply waiting for a coin to rise.
While this might seem like a no-brainer, there is a bit more to it than just buying a cryptocurrency and praying.
💸Firstly, you should always try and buy during a dip, this ensures you won’t get caught out and end up having to wait months for a coin to rise back up in value.
Secondly, this method isn’t a get-rich-quick scheme, you need to have faith in the long-term potential of the project; make sure it has solid technology and a good team behind it.
HOW elon musk moves crypto 🤳Elon Musk has been a big proponent of cryptocurrency for a while now.
While the huge amount of publicity he generates for crypto is excellent and benefits the market as a whole, his actions have previously spelled disaster for investors.
Earlier this year in May, after a month of praising cryptocurrency Musk released a tweet stating Tesla would no longer be accepting Bitcoin, this sent shockwaves through the crypto space.
💣The price of Bitcoin crashed sending the market into a frenzy, investors rushed to sell their crypto before prices fell anymore.
This created a snowball effect, people were selling, driving prices down, which in turn, resulted in even more people selling.
Ultimately, Musk tweeted that Tesla would begin accepting Bitcoin again and prices started to stabilize.
Although it’s easy to get caught up in the news, oftentimes it pays to stick to your guns instead of getting caught up in the opinions of others.
Cycle of Crypto Trader Emotions 👉 In cryptocurrency, managing your emotions well can be the difference between making thousands and losing everything.
Every trader goes through a cycle of emotions, when everything is green and the market is in your favour you’ll become elated and euphoric, when it begins to drop anxiety and fear start to take hold, culminating and intensifying as the price continues to fall until you reach the and find anger and despair.
👉 Where along this cycle would you sell? You might be thinking “just as anxiety and fear take hold”, after all, this would shield you from any large losses.
In reality, that’s already far too late, it’s better to sell at peak happiness, right when your investments are hitting all-time highs.
👉 A period of extreme growth is almost always followed by a dip, which would allow you to buy back in, increasing your position size.
Once you master your emotions you can trade without bias, putting you on the path to becoming a professional trader.
thank you for reading! ♥ And don't forget to share this e-book with your friends and familY! All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced or used in any manner without written permission of the copyright owner.
© 2021 by Finance Illustrated.
1Profiting FromcryptocurrenciesHow to profit from Bitcoinand cryptocurrencies in just20 mins a day(Includes section on How to Invest in Initial CoinOfferings – ICOs)Marcus de Maria2Risk and Disclaimer:These Terms and Conditions form a part of InvestmentMastery Enrolment agreement with you (this ‘Agreement’)and apply to all online Membership coursesYourCryptoBook that are specified below and for whichyou wish to enrol (‘YourCryptoBook’ or ‘YCB’), to theexclusion of all other terms and conditions issued orstipulated by anyone else other than Investment Mastery.The information presented by Investment Mastery or anyof its staff is for educational purposes.
Any examples usedare for educational and illustrative purposes only.Investment Mastery is not a stockbroker, broker dealer, orinvestment advisors.
They are not recommendingparticular stocks, options, forex, CFD, Cryptocurrencies.The names of any firms of Crypto Exchange, stockbroker,stock exchange, financial institutions, financial planners,bookmakers, or financial websites mentioned are forillustrative purposes only.
The decision on which companyto use if any is at the total discretion of each individualperson.
It is recommended that you seek a professionallicensed broker prior to implementing any investmentprogramme or financial plan.
The world ofCryptocurrenceis is HIGHLY speculative and you can loseall your investments.
Investment Mastery cannotguarantee any results or investment returns based on theinformation you receive.
You must read and understandthe above and be aware of the risks of all trading andinvesting and be willing to accept them before investing.34Table Of Contents – Chapters and Headings1.
Introduction2.
What are the benefits and what problem does it solve?3.
Why is it important for YOU?4.
What are the main cryptocurrencies and what do they do?5.
Where is the value of cryptocurrencies, how are prices determinedand what could Bitcoin be worth in the future?6.
How to make money with cryptocurrencies?7.
How to start buying Bitcoins, Ethereum and other Altcoins8.
Which strategies do I use?9.
How to keep your cryptocurrencies safe and store them10.
How to track them once you have bought them11.
How to make money i.e.
when to sell them12.
Is it too late to get into cryptocurrencies – have you missed theboat?13.
What is an Initial Coin offering (ICO) and how to profit from it?14.
Asset allocation and how much to invest in cryptocurrencies15.
Are there any drawbacks to investing in cryptocurrencies?16.
The future of cryptocurrency17.
Cryptocurrency Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)18.
APPENDIXBitcoin White Paper – a Must Read for allHistory of Money56ForewordI am not going to print this bookThe changes that are happening on an almost day to daybasis means that if I print it, parts of the book will beredundant within a few monthsCryptocurrencies and the Blockchain will change the waywe see the world.It cuts out middlemen, fees and timewasters.And at the same time, fortunes will be made.Not just by the owners of the companies, but by thoseindividuals who are brave enough to get involved at thisearly stage in investing in Cryptocurrencies, ICOs andcompanies set to benefit from blockchain technology.This book was written for you, the beginner, in mind.I hope it helps.The best is yet to come.To your successMarcus de Maria71.
Introduction“Science-Fiction is now Science-fact”- UnknownAt the end of 2016 I read that some cryptocurrencies had gone up by 5000% injust 12 months.
I decided to do some research, fast.
This is what I found: $100worth of Bitcoins bought in 2010 would be worth well over $27 million today.How could I have missed out on those returns? It was time to get in.A few weeks of research later and I had bought 15 different cryptocurrenciesusing speculation money.
Most of the coins quickly went into profit, somesubstantially.
I decided I needed to take this more seriously and really do someresearch.
If not me then who? If not now then when? You have to be in thegame to win it!I paid several thousand dollars for the best crypto subscription service I couldfind, and started buying more and more cryptos based on theirrecommendations.
I got obsessed – I was even listening to it while goingrunning.
At the time of writing, I now own more than 36 different cryptos andover 50+ positions, have banked some profits and am still up over 70% on myentire investments.
Not a bad start.8As you can see, I invested $73,000 and made a profit of $64,000 which is an88% gain.
This happened in as little as just 3 months.
This was definitely helpedby a fast growing Altcoin called NEO.
I invested just $850 and turned that into$26,300 profit! I am not sure where else you can do that at the current timebut it is possible with cryptocurrencies.So what are cryptocurrencies and where did it all start?1.
A decentralised system for sending money to other peopleMost payment systems run on a centralised network.
The problem with this isthat you have to incur unnecessary and expensive transaction fees.
Usually,this is done by a central server that keeps track of your balances i.e.
your creditcard and/or the banks.
It can also take several days for one bank to talk toanother bank and so sending money becomes both expensive and takes toolong.A programmer calling himself Satoshi Nakamoto successfully found a way tobuild a decentralised digital cash system, thus avoiding the need for acentralised system.
He describes it in a surprisingly simple way in his WhitePaper for Bitcoin, which I have added in the Appendix.
You should read itbefore buying Bitcoin.9A decentralised system means the network is powered by its users withouthaving any third party, central authority or middleman controlling it.
Neithercentral banks or Governments has power over this system.2.
What are cryptocurrencies?Cryptocurrencies are digital currencies which can be used to digitally transfermoney to another person safely, without having to use intermediaries ortrusted third parties, like a bank or Visa, e.g., to verify that you have sent themoney and the money is now no longer yours.
You might want to read thatsentence again, slowly.
In addition, it does it much faster at a fraction of thecost because it does away with unnecessary and expensive transaction fees.Why 'crypto'?The way digital currencies provide safety is two-fold.
The first is that it usesEncryption technology (hence the name cryptocurrency).What is the blockchain?10The second way is to have a public ledger, where all the transactions are kept.Thousands of computers around the world are linked together to display thisledger.
They refresh and update every few minutes.
This network of computersall linked together in this way is called the blockchain.
You can trust it becauseit means that each transaction has been verified again and again by all thecomputers (the blockchain).
With thousands of computers linked up all overthe world saying the same thing, the ledger’s integrity is upheld.
Eachcryptocurrency can have its own blockchain, although some are shared.How does this work?Imagine I send you 10 dollars and you send the 10 dollars to someone else.Somehow someone has to keep track of these transactions, to avoid forgeriesor anyone claiming they haven’t received the money.
In the past, Central Banksor banks have kept details of the transaction on something called a ledger.
Thisis based on a centralised system.
With Bitcoin, currently the main digitalcurrency, the whole system was turned on its head.
Instead of a centralisedsystem controlling the ledger, now thousands of computers, all around theworld, each keep a copy of this Ledger.
Every single transaction is kept there,from the beginning to present day.
This is a decentralised system, called the‘blockchain’.Please note that money in itself does not have any intrinsic value – it is onlybecause we believe that it has value that it is worth anything.
Money is just atracking system – we track what we own and what we owe.
This is called aledger.
Whatever form of money exists, we give it value because of its utility asa ledger (or tracking system of who owes what).
That’s what the blockchain is –a giant decentralised ledger.Why are so many computers necessary?11The idea comes from airplane safety.
If you have one computer flying the planeand the system crashes, the airplane could crash.
The thought was that if therewere three computers, and one crashed, then the fact that two computerswere saying something different to one meant that the two outweighed theone and the plane would continue even if one crashed.
The inventors of theblockchain took it one step further and wanted as many computers as possibleto be in on it.
So if there is a disagreement on a few computers of theblockchain, whatever the majority e.g.
51% are saying will win and thatinformation is put on the ledger on all the computers.A particularly brilliant analogy for this comes from Nick Szabo, the inventor ofBitgold, which many view as the precursor of Bitcoin.
Imagine a fly trapped inamber.
If there is only a small layer of amber, we know that the fly has notbeen trapped for very long.
But if there is a big block of amber, we know thatthe fly has been trapped for a long time – no one can dispute that.The blockchain computers are forming a layer of amber every time atransaction occurs.
Once the amber covers the transaction, it is very difficult tochange.
Each layer of amber on top makes it more difficult to change.
Each daymore information and more amber are layered on top.12In other words, millions of small transactions, i.e.
me sending you some moneyin another country, are documented on the blockchain, locking them in forgood, so that they can’t be changed afterwards.
The information (or fly) istrapped as irrefutable evidence and the transaction can’t be undone.
That'sthe whole point of the decentralised system – the computers allow it to remaindecentralised and in the hands of many as opposed to the hands of a few whoare trying to control the many.What are miners?There are two ways of getting Bitcoin.
You can either buy one at the currentprice (today’s price is $4,200 for one Bitcoin) or you can ‘mine’ it.
The analogyis like mining for Gold.
However, with digital currencies it is slightly different,as you don’t have to go down a mine to do so.
With cryptocurrencies, you haveto do it through something called, ‘Proof of Work’.
Proof of Work refers to thefact that if you want a Bitcoin, you have to literally prove that you have donework and in return you get paid in Bitcoin tokens.In cryptocurrencies this is done by creating a scenario where if you want to getpaid in Bitcoins, you have to do something which is not easy to do i.e.
you haveto commit your computers to solving puzzles or mathematical functions.
If thecomputer solves the puzzle then it proves that you have dedicated power,time, effort, heat and computation to solve the problem.
The more you do thisthe more of a ‘vote’ you are allowed to have.
This vote is embodied in a Bitcointoken.
You receive a token of Bitcoin (a fraction of a Bitcoin) in return formining it.Only miners are able to confirm a transaction.
This is their role in thecryptocurrency network.
They record transactions, verify them and dispersethe transactional information in the network.For every completed transaction monitored and facilitated by the miners, theyare rewarded with a token of cryptocurrency, for instance with Bitcoins.13What this does is introduce scarcity into the system.
Scarcity is importantbecause the only way anything has any value is because it is scarce.
If Gold, likepebbles, were to be found everywhere, it wouldn’t have any value.
ButBitcoins are not easy to mine – it takes computational power and time to do itAND there are a maximum of 21 million that can ever be mined.
This createsinstant scarcity.TermsAn Altcoin (Alternative coins) is the name given to coins which were set up tocompete with Bitcoin, like Dash, Litecoin and even Dogecoin.
The term‘crypto’, short for cryptocurrency, is used for all coins.A digital currency is a virtual currency.
It is unregulated, issued and usuallycontrolled by its developers, and used and accepted among the members of aspecific virtual community.
It is a medium of exchange that operates like acurrency in that specific environment but not necessarily outside of it.A cryptocurrency is a currency based on certain principles of cryptography.
It isa type of digital token that relies on these principles to chain together digitalsignatures of token transfers.
It is based on a peer-to-peer network and it isdecentralised.In most situations, cryptocurrency is also a digital currency, though, in evenmore cases, digital currency is not a cryptocurrency.Summary:Bitcoin is a software program that allows people to securely transfer moneyover the internet without a bank.It does this by replacing the function of a bank with a network of computersrunning the software that verifies and transfers the money.These computers, known as miners, maintain a global ledger of transactionsthat is used to validate, verify and transfer money.142.
What are the benefits ofCryptos and whatproblem do they solve?The new digital revolution of money.Cryptocurrency has many appealing benefits.
Some of this is thanks to theblockchain technology previously mentioned.
It is a strictly monitored processwith encrypted transaction and control.A quick history of moneySince the beginning of human time, people have used something scarce as asource of value.
At the start they used bartering one object for another.
Buthow can you buy a cow if you only have two chickens? A third entity wasneeded, so they used the scarcest of seashells.
Then came coins made ofprecious metals.
At the beginning, coins did not have a value stamped onthem, rather the coins were weighed.
Only later was an actual value stampedonto the coin.Next was paper money backed by precious metal e.g.
Gold.
The idea was thatyou could literally walk into a bank and ask for the equivalent of your banknotes in Gold.
Then paper was taken off the Gold Standard and was not backedby anything, allowing the printing of money to flourish.
This is the current ‘fiat’money.15The problem is that fiat money is not scarce.
More money can be printed andso every year it is worth less and less.
The only store of value that retains itsvalue is Gold.
But Gold is not easy to store, not easy to sub-divide and not easyto transport.For a full breakdown of the timeline of the History of Money, see Appendices.Scarcity is an essential part of cryptos.
Take the largest, Bitcoin for example.
Asalready stated, only 21 million will ever be made, so scarcity is part of thesystem.1.
No Third-Party InvolvementThere’s always a process you go through when using traditional money to buyyourself a new property, set up your own business or buy a new car etc.
Oneway or another, the process requires a third-party involvement.
We are talkinglawyers, owners and some other external factors such as delays,documentation, extra fees etc.
This in general will consume unnecessary time,money and energy to the point of giving up in some cases.Recently, I wanted to send some money over to the USA.
In order to do that, Ihad to pick up the phone to my bank.
I was stuck in a queue listening to musicfor over eight minutes just to start the process.
I was then charged for sendingthe money plus an extortionate Foreign Exchange rate which did not resemblethe real rate.
Finally, since the transaction was via something called anintermediary bank, I was told that they would likely charge me as well,although they could not tell me how much.
The money, I was told, would bethere within 3-5 working days.
Since it was a large amount of money the wholething probably cost me over $200 if you include the Foreign Exchange spread,maybe more.
I agreed to everything because, well, I didn’t have manyalternatives.With cryptos, I can send Bitcoins directly to the other person from mycomputer to theirs online, within 10 minutes.
There is no spread, no ForeignExchange (Forex) charge, intermediaries etc.
And the whole thing might costme $10 maximum.So if you want to save a lot of time and money then cryptos are the way to go.16In short, you are in control of your own money using cryptocurrency.
This iswhat we call the ‘decentralised’ system.
It is possible to be able to pay andreceive money anywhere in the world at any given time.
Your transactions arepractically immune to any influence from your Government, with minimumprocessing fees, thus preventing users from having to pay extra charges frombanks or any financial institutions.Now imagine this in EVERY part of society – from legal contracts between twocompanies to sending money across the world; from keeping money in escrowwhen buying a house to online payments.
Basically, anywhere where there iscurrently a ’middleman’ who is either 1.
Slowing it down, or 2.
Making it moreexpensive.2.
Lower risk than traditional currenciesIn this era, most people rarely have their cash in their possession now.
Instead,they have an array of credit cards, debit cards and other payment cardsavailable as their nation’s method of payment.
Nothing’s wrong with that,however if the store’s connection to the server is disconnected or theirmachine is out of service, and you do not possess any cash, you cannot pay.When using your card, you are giving the end-receiver access to your full-creditline.
No matter how small the amount of the transaction is, the fact that youare giving someone your card to gain access to your account is already a formof ‘breach’.
Most of this ‘breach’ is considered secure nowadays using differingsafety measures like ‘PIN enabled’ or other methods.
Then the store initiatespayment by ‘pulling’ the designated amount from your account using theinformation provided within your card.Cryptocurrency doesn’t work that way.
Instead of a ‘pulling’ mechanism, it‘pushes’ the amount that is needed to be paid or received to othercryptocurrency holders without any further information needed.
Payments arepossible without your personal information being tied to you or thetransaction.
Your account can be backed up and encrypted to ensure the safetyof your money.By allowing users to be in control of their transactions helps keep Bitcoin, Etheror other larger cryptocurrencies safe for the network.173.
Protection from fraudWe often hear of cases where someone’s payment card is being used by otherusers but not the owner.
When contacting his card’s service issuer, it is foundthat the card has made certain transactions without his consent.
This is whatwe call a fraud case.Most of the time the perpetrators of these fraud cases get away with the crimebecause it is not easy to trace the fraud back to the perpetrator.
What’s moreit is even difficult to get the attention of law enforcers to launch aninvestigation.However, cryptocurrency is not viable to be used for fraud.
Due to the fact thatyour personal information is kept hidden from prying eyes, this protects youagainst identity theft.Remember, cryptocurrency is a form of digital money, created from code.Individual cryptocurrencies are, as mentioned, digital and cannot becounterfeited by senders.Because the transactions cannot be reversed, they do not carry with them anypersonal information.
This ensures security and the merchants are protectedfrom any potential losses that might occur from fraud cases.It is very hard to cheat using these cryptocurrencies due to its decentralisedsystem and the existing blockchain system.
It cannot be manipulated byanyone or any organisation thanks to it being cryptographically secure.
All thecomputers have a copy of all the transactions and the computers arecontinuously talking to each other.
This is the most secure way of doing it as noone can hack in and make changes.If someone wanted to hack into the blockchain they would be wasting theirtime hacking into just one or a few computers, since the information on themajority of computers always wins.
So in order to hack in they would have tohack 51% of the computers around the world that make up the blockchain tomake a change.
The computational power required to do this is prohibitive.18Also it would take some time.
The blockchain updates or refreshes its dataevery few minutes, giving a would-be hacker a few minutes window to hack inbefore everything is reset.
After that they would have to start again.
So notonly would they have to hack into 51% of the thousands of computers aroundthe world that make up the blockchain, but they would also have just a fewminutes window to do it in.4.
UniversalityOver the course of payment history, nations worldwide had their differingmethods of payments.
We had bartering or money-goods exchange systems.
Itwasn't until traders visited other countries that they found out how to tradeitems with one another.Thanks to various innovations and developments, we now have multiplemethods to trade and exchange moneys worldwide.But even with all the upgrades, we are still experiencing problems doingtransactions across the globe.
There are always currency issues, bankauthorisations, unacceptable payment methods and some other varying issuesexperienced by business owners or travellers abroad.Fact is, not all countries have similar financial procedures.
Your card orcurrency may not be accepted by other countries and that is a major setbackfor some people.
For example, most online banking, payment or cash systemrequires additional processing fees for their service.However, cryptocurrencies are not bound by any of the exchange rates,transaction charges, the interest rates or any other fees applied by anycountries.
They can be used at any time, in any part of the world, withoutexperiencing any problems.It also saves a lot of your time and money by reducing additional spending overtransferring money from and to multiple countries.
Which meanscryptocurrency operates on an international platform which in turn maketransactions easier than your average bank to bank transfer.Cryptocurrencies have three important properties:1.
Transactional Property19Cryptocurrency transaction is fast and global.
Transactions are propagatedimmediately in the network and are confirmed within minutes.
Since thetransactions are managed by a global network of computers, they do not takeinto account your physical location.
It is possible for you to send yourcryptocurrency to someone in your vicinity, or even if they are living on theother side of the world.2.
Monetary PropertiesSome people want to use Gold as a monetary value.
However, it is not easy tostore, it is not easy to subdivide and it is not easy to send.
Because it is heavy,sending it would also be costly.
Cryptocurrencies can be seen as digital goldbecause they are easy to store, easy to subdivide, easy to send & transport andless costly.The currencies are in controlled supply; thus there is a high chance that thevalue of the currencies appreciates over time.
As mentioned earlier, Bitcoinwill somehow reach its final number somewhere in 2140.3.
Revolutionary PropertyYou have more control of what is going on in your account and how the systemworks and operates.
This is due to the decentralised network of peers whichkeeps a consensus on account balances and the transactions made.
Ascompared to your physical bank account, which can be changed and controlledby people you don’t see and governed by rules you don’t even know (howmany of us really read the small-print?).20I attended the 2017 World Blockchain Conference in London.
Look, to prove it Ihave a picture of me in the audience.
Can you see me in the red circle? :--)Two things became clear.
Firstly, there is big excitement aboutCryptocurrencies and this excitement is growing rapidly.
The organisers toldme that last year there were only 30 people at the conference.
This year therewere well over 300 as far as I could see.Secondly, whether believed in cryptocurrencies or not, everyone believed thatblockchain would transform the world.Even people like Jamie Dimon, Head of JP Morgan, who is a fierce critic ofBitcoin, is heavily investing in the blockchain, because of the many applicationsof the blockchain and the potential it has to disrupt most industries, includinghis own.21One strategy I am therefore pursuing is to find current public companies in thestock market which are set to gain from the use of blockchain technology.Some of them are established companies and some of them are fairly new, butyou can buy them on the stock market now.223.
Why is it important forYOU?"Nothing in life is to be feared, it is only to be understood."– Marie CurieLike most things tech, the realm of cryptocurrency can be a bit complex tomaster and is still new to many.
But the benefits of purchasing this currencyare surely worth your investment in both time and money.
Experts have alsopredicted that it may be the next big thing in finance.1.
Crypto Trading and InvestingBitcoin trading can be very profitable for both professionals and beginners.
Themarket is new, where arbitrage and margin trading is widely available.
Thecurrency’s high volatility has also played a major role in bringing new investorsto the trading market.Compared to other financial currencies, Bitcoin has very little barrier to entry.If you already own Bitcoin, no verification is required and you can start tradingalmost instantly.
Moreover, Bitcoin is not fiat currency.
This simply means theprice is not related to the economy or policies of any single country.And unlike stock markets, there are no official Bitcoin exchanges.
Instead,hundreds of Bitcoin exchanges operate 24/7 around the world.
Because thereare no official exchanges, this results in no official Bitcoin price andthecurrency is known for its rapid and frequent price movements.2.
Personal SpendingSecondly is personal spending.
There are millions of items now being sold forBitcoins and this number is only increasing.
You can use Bitcoin to purchasealmost anything! From buying cars (Tesla) to travelling the world (Cheapair).From buying a Microsoft product to paying Estate Agents.233.
HUGE potentialWe could well be in the midst of the next Gold Rush.
If that is the case, do youreally want to miss out?For me personally, I wouldn't want to be the one who said "I knew it was goingto be big, but I was too lazy to do anything about it and yet again I missed outwhile everyone else made a fortune" AND "What if everything I have learnedso far has led me up until this point." I even had the thought “What if I becomethe Warren Buffett of cryptocurrencies? Someone has to – why not me?" LOL.4.
Don't need a lot of moneyYou don’t need a lot of money to make really sizeable profits – even a fewhundred could turn into tens of thousands.Have you heard of Erik Finman? The teenage Bitcoin millionaire who startedpicking up Bitcoin at only $12 a piece back in May 2011, when he was just 12years old.
He received the Bitcoin as a tip from his brother and a $1000 giftfrom his grandmother.He now reportedly owns 403 Bitcoins, which holds a value of roughly $4000where it has accumulated to a stash of just over $1.6 million and change.I personally bought £850 worth of Antshares (now called NEO) and turned thatinto over £40,000 in three months.
Where else can you get 4000% return inthree months?5.
VolatilityYou might have thought that Forex was volatile.
You haven't seen anything yet.There are days when the portfolio is down by -15% and the next up by 15%.Individual coins can fluctuate by 50% in one week.
One of my coins went upover 100% in just one day.
In stocks, this kind of volatility would take an entireyear!Volatility is our friend – most people are scared of it because they feel theycan’t control it, but it is great.
How else can we buy low and sell high? An ideais to wait for the coin to go down and start buying into it in order to lower ouraverage price.244.
We are just at the startThe majority of people haven't heard of cryptocurrencies and even less aboutthe blockchain, meaning the value will increase as they become mainstream.254.
What are the maincryptocurrencies and what dothey do?There are around 1000 coins/Altcoins.
Some are legitimate and some may notbe.
It is imperative that you do your own research before investingWhich ones are the best ones?This changes all the time – do your research.
We will go more in depth into thisin the Chapter “How do you make money in cryptocurrencies?”Below are the largest coins at time of writing in terms of their marketcapitalisation (price in dollars x number of shares in the market).
They are in noparticular order:a.
BitcoinWhat problem does it solve?The first blockchain, solving the problem of duplication and manipulation.
It'slike Liquid Gold.This is the first ever cryptocurrency invented and remains by far the mostsought after cryptocurrency to date.
Bitcoin is known as the digital goldstandard in the cryptocurrency network.
As explained, Bitcoin is the pioneer ofblockchain technology that made digital money possible.It is the first ever decentralised peer-to-peer network powered by its userswithout any central authority or middleman which means no unnecessarycosts are included in the digital money transaction.26One major advantage that it has over other cryptocurrencies is Bitcoins areimpossible to counterfeit or inflate.
The reason being there are only 21 millionBitcoins created for mining, no more no less.
Therefore it is predicted by 2140,all Bitcoins will already be mined.Thanks to its blockchain technology, you have ultimate control over yourmoney and transactions without having to go through a third party such as thebank or PayPal.Interesting fact: WikiLeaks would not be here if it weren't for Bitcoin.
Whencredit card companies stopped their service to WikiLeaks, people used Bitcointo keep the service alive.Media companies and investment firms in South Korea, India, Australia,Canada and Japan have started discussing on how Bitcoin may surpass thevalue of certain fiat currencies in the future as an alternative monetary system.Japan even made it an official currency in April 2017, paving the way for othercountries to do the same.Over the years of Bitcoin’s existence, its value has fluctuated tremendouslyfrom zero to over $4200 per Bitcoin to date.Have I invested in Bitcoin?I buy Bitcoin to then exchange it for other Altcoins, so I hold very few Bitcoins.b.
EthereumThe second most popular currency is Ethereum.
It has scored itself the secondspot in the hierarchy of cryptocurrencies.
This digital currency, launched in2015, is predicted to surpass Bitcoin and may be the cryptocurrency of thefuture.Is Ethereum similar to Bitcoin?It is in a way, but not really.
Like Bitcoin, Ethereum is a part of a blockchainnetwork.
The main difference between the two currencies is that the Bitcoinblockchain focuses on tracking ownership of the digital currency while theEthereum blockchain focuses on running the programming code or network.27Instead of having to build an entirely original blockchain for each newapplication, Ethereum enables the development of thousands of differentapplications in a single platform.
In the Ethereum blockchain, miners work toearn Ether.
Ether is a crypto token that helps run the network.Another use of the Ethereum blockchain is its ability to decentralise anyservices that are centralised.
For instance, Ethereum is able to decentraliseservices like loans provided by banks, online transactions using PayPal as wellas voting systems and much more.Ethereum can also be used to build a Decentralised Autonomous Organisation(DAO).
A DAO is a fully autonomous organisation without a leader.
DAOs arerun by programming codes on a collection of smart contracts written in theEthereum blockchain.
DAO is designed to replace the structure of a traditionalorganisation and, like Bitcoin, eliminating the need for people and acentralised control.What problem does it solve?Ethereum solves the problems of legal contracts online, eliminating middlementaking fees from transactions.Firstly, a third party cannot make any changes to the data.
The system is alsotamper and corruption proof.
This is because Ethereum is built based on anetwork formed around a consensus which, as a result, makes censorshipimpossible.Secondly, just like Bitcoin, Ethereum is backed up by secure cryptography.Therefore, the applications are well protected against any form of hacking.Ethereum went from around $400 to a low of $149 to its current price of $317.Do I hold Ethereum?This is my second largest holding.
I bought into Ethereum on 10 separateoccasions as the price was falling from its high.
At time of writing that positionis up by 31%.c.
Ethereum Classic28A few years back someone hacked into an Ethereum-based application andstole millions.
There was an internal argument about whether this eventshould be allowed to happen or to go back in time and make good the moneyso no one loses out.
The purists whoargued that there is no going back inblockchain technology broke away to form the new Ethereum Classic.What problem does it solve?It is essentially the same as Ethereum, so it is unclear why we need two of thesame.
However, lately it is looking to distinguish itself from Ethereum.Do I hold Ethereum Classic?Yes, I have one position in Ethereum Classic which at time of writing is up220%.d.
RippleRipple was launched in 2012.What problem does it solve?Banks can use Ripple to make payments faster and cheaper nationally andinternationally.If you have sent money overseas, you will have used a SWIFT code which is anentity with a monopoly on border transfers – in 200 countries, with more than11,000 financial institutions forming its branches.However, Ripple while working together with financial services, banks andinstitutions wants to take down SWIFT and disrupt its functionality.Ripple is actually a technology that has a dual function; as a digital currency aswell as a digital payment network for financial transactions.Unlike the other cryptocurrencies, Ripple operates on an open-source and apeer-to-peer decentralised platform which allows a transfer of money in anyform, both fiat and cryptocurrency.29Ripple uses a middleman in the currency transactions.
The medium (themiddleman) known as “Getaway” acts as a link in the network between twoparties wanting to make a transaction.The way it works is that the Gateway functions as a credit intermediary thatreceives and sends currencies to public addresses over the Ripple network.This is why Ripple is less popular when compared to the other digitalcurrencies.
Also, many people don’t like Ripple because they believe thatcryptocurrencies is an answer to the domination of the current banking systemand Ripple works with the banks.Ripple acts as a bridge for other currencies which includes both fiat andcryptocurrencies.
In Ripple’s network, any currency can be exchanged betweenone another.If user X wants Bitcoins as the form of payment for his services from Y, then Ydoes not necessarily have to possess Bitcoins.
Y can pay X to X’s Gateway usingUS Dollars or any other currencies.
X will then receive Bitcoins converted fromthe US Dollars from his Gateway.The nature of Ripple’s network and its systems exposes its users to certainrisks.
Even though you are able to exchange any currencies, the Ripple networkdoes not run with a proof-of-work system like Bitcoin.
Instead, transactions areheavily reliant on a consensus protocol in order to validate account balancesand transactions on the system.But Ripple does improve some features of traditional banks.
Namely,transactions are completed within seconds on a Ripple network even thoughthe system handles millions of transactions frequently.With traditional banks, even a wire transfer may take up days or weeks tocomplete.
The fee to conduct transactions on Ripple is also very minimal, asopposed to large fees charged by banks to complete cross-border payments.Do I own Ripple?30I have three positions in Ripple due to a Tim Ferris podcast with Nick Szabo, thecreator of BitGold.
Nick said that the currencies that could cross the bridgebetween the current banking system and the new digital system would be thewinners.
Ripple is the first to attempt this.At time of writing, this position is up by 14%.e.
MoneroWhat problem does it solve?The technology solves the problem of privacy.
People who might be underdictatorship of governments can use Monero to keep their identity hidden.
Soit has a real function to help the underprivileged in the world regardless ofyour creed, colour, sex etc.
who might not be able to existing systems, not beable to open a bank account etc.Monero's main goal was to create an algorithm to add the privacy featuresthat is missing in Bitcoin.
Monero invented a system to conceal the identity ofits senders and recipients.The system combines a user’s private account keys with public keys obtainedfrom Monero’s blockchain to create a ring of possible signers that would notallow outsiders to link a signature to a specific user.While Monero users have the ability to keep their transactions private, theyare also able to share their information selectively.Monero has received the acceptance of multiple dark web marketplaces andhas generated its own fan base due to its privacy settings.
Therefore, it is lessspeculative as compared to other digital currencies and traders purchaseMonero as a hedge for other cryptocurrencies.Do I own Monero?Yes, I have three positions in Monero which at time of writing are up by 138%.f.
DashDash – Digital Cash is one of the most promising alternative coins to Bitcoin.31Dash is unlike other cryptocurrency projects like Ethereum or Stratis which aremore of a development platform.Dash advocates itself as peer-to-peer decentralised electronic cash.
It intendsto be as liquid as real cash which we use in our respective countries.Dash is built upon Bitcoin’s core code with the addition of new features (suchas privacy and quick transactions).Like Bitcoin, Dash is open-source and has its own blockchain, walletinfrastructure, and community.
But unlike Bitcoin, its transaction fee isnegligible.Moreover, it appears from the attitude of the development community thatDash will only remain as digital money for the Internet, which is a good thing.Dash is designed to have a total supply of 18 million coins.At present, the circulating supply of Dash is over 8 million and it will reach 18million in the year 2300.Do I own Dash?I only have one position which is up by 216%.
This is one I wish I had more of.
Iam looking for any weakness in the dollar price to get in again.g.
LitecoinWhen the currency was first launched, it aspired to be the ‘silver’ to Bitcoin’s‘gold’.The main reason of Litecoin’s creation is to make up what Bitcoin lacked.
Themain difference between Litecoin and Bitcoin is the 2.5 minute time togenerate a block for Litecoin, as opposed to Bitcoin’s 10 minutes.For miners and technical experts, the Litecoin possesses a very importantdifference to Bitcoin, and that is a more improved work algorithm whichspeeds up the hashing power and system altogether.One of the biggest advantages that Litecoin possesses is it can handle a highervolume of transactions thanks to its algorithm.
The faster block time alsoprevents double spending attacks.32While Litecoin failed to secure and maintain its second place after Bitcoin, it isstill actively mined and traded and is bought by investors as a backup in caseBitcoin fails.Do I own Litecoin?This is an interesting one because it has a lot of promise but it just doesn’tseem to be going in the right direction.
If it doesn’t do something soon it mightbe overtaken by some of the promising new coins like Dash.
I hold one positionwhich at time of writing is up by 22%.You can look up the market capitalisation and more information on theabove on www.coinmarketcap.com335.
Where is the value ofcryptocurrencies, how areprices determined andwhat could Bitcoin beworth in the future?“Bitcoin will go to $500,000 within three years or I willeat my own penis”- John McAfee, the founder of McAfee software and CEO of MGTCapital Investments and one of the largest Bitcoin miningcompanies in the world.5a.
Where is the value of Bitcoin and cryptocurrencies?Some people call Bitcoin and the blockchain ‘Internet 3.0’.
We understandwhy they may see it in this way, however, we have to be clear that Bitcoinis a different technology to the Internet.
Bitcoin and Ethereum are what iscalled a ‘Fat Protocol’.34For the Internet ‘HTTP’ is a protocol that defines how information is sent overthe Internet.
On the back of these protocols, programmers built applicationlike Facebook and Google.
While these protocols created an enormous value,most of the value was captured by the applications that were built on top ofthe Internet.
Meaning that the people who created HTTP didn’t make moneyand are relatively unknown.
However, the owners of Facebook and Googlebecame billionaires and are celebrated entrepreneurs.With Bitcoin and a platform like Ethereum, it is the actual network itself that isgenerating the value.
Tokenholders are the ones who are going to benefit.
Thevalue will be captured by those building and investing at the blockchainprotocol layer because of the financial incentives (tokens) that are part of thenetwork’s design.Participants of the network (users, developers, investors etc) are incentivisedto grow the blockchain network because as the network expands the tokensare going to be worth more.355b.
How Are prices determined?A.
The value of cryptocurrencies are dependent on the market, where theprices of various cryptocurrencies vary a lot and it is one of the mostfluctuating and volatile markets to date.B.
The price of cryptocurrencies, like any other products, is dependent ondemand and supply.
If more people demand a particular currency and itis short in supply, then the value increases.
More units are mined byminers to balance the flow.
However, most currencies limit the supply oftheir tokens.C.
Scarcity is an important factor when compared to fiat currencies.
Fiatcurrencies can be printed every day, making our money worth less everyyear.
Digital currencies, however, have limited supply.
For instance, thetotal amount of Bitcoin issued is only 21 million.
Therefore, Bitcoin’ssupply will decrease in time and will reach its final number by 2140.
Italso explains why Bitcoin’s value is higher compared to othercryptocurrencies.
Dash has the same idea, limiting itself to 18.9 million –this might explain why its price is also doing well.36D.
Trust.
This one is often overlooked but, like with any currency, tokenswill only have value if people have trust in it.
Trust comes from a lot ofsources such as the credibility of the developers, the kind of serviceprovided etc.5c.
What could the price of Bitcoin be?Well, this is the 64 million dollar question, isn’t it?A client of mine and I came up with quasi the same potential possible futurevaluation = $100,000 per Bitcoin.
This is how we calculated it – it’s not veryscientific.
If Bitcoin really is Liquid Gold and so becomes the new ‘GoldenStandard’ as a store of value, then you have to figure out the current value ofall the Gold in the world that has been mined.If that is valued at approximately 8 trillion dollars and if Bitcoin reaches thatsame level and there are only 21 million Bitcoins ever mined, then that wouldmean $400,000 per Bitcoin.
Important here is the scarcity factor – if that everchanged and more were created, then all bets are off.A multi-millionaire investor friend of mine once told me a long time ago that ifyou talk to a start up founder and they say their business is going to make xprofits in y time, and it would take z costs to do it, then it will probably be halfthe amount of profits, take double the amount of time and cost double theamount.
I have very much taken this to heart throughout my investing career.Therefore, on a potential valuation of $400,000 I would halve it and halve itagain.
That’s how I came up with a potential number of $100,000.
I told you,not very scientific.
It still leaves Bitcoin with a lot of upside.
I just don’t knowhow long it will take.
It’s going to take longer than you think.If you feel this valuation is not big enough, then there are others who believeBitcoin could go to $1 million valuation per Bitcoin.
John McAfee, the founderof McAfee software and CEO of MGT Capital Investments and one of thelargest Bitcoin mining companies in the world has publicly bet that Bitcoin willhit $500,000 within three years or he will eat his own penis.
That’s a dangerous37thing to say because I think due to its scarcity it will go up but I don’t knowWHEN.There are a few things that could act as a catalyst.
China has banned bitcoinbefore and unbanned it If it were to unban again then prices would explodeAlso when leverage comes in prices will explode –Now I hope Bitcoin hits $500,000 within three years for more than onereason…386.
How to make money withcryptocurrencies?There are many ways to make money with cryptocurrencies.
The four mostpopular ones are:1.
You can mine themThis is where you use your computer(s) to mine for Bitcoin i.e.
usethe computational power of your computer(s) to help verifycertain transactions on the blockchain and be rewarded withBitcoin or other coins.In my opinion there is not much money in it for the averageperson.2.
You can lend themThis is where traders who need margin and leverage borrow yourcoins to trade with.
They have to give them back to you with a %commission.3.
You can buy already established cryptocurrenciesThis is the topic of the following chapters.4.
You can buy new ICOsRecently there have been a flurry of new Initial Coin Offeringswhere, if you get it right, you can invest £1,000 and turn it into £10,000or even £100,000 in a relatively short period of time.
Therefore, we willalso be discussing this topic.When choosing cryptocurrencies, do your research.
Don't get caught up in thehype.
When you are researching, remember to ask:1.
"What problem is it solving?” If it doesn’t solve a problem then why wouldanyone use it or buy it? And392.
"Does it have the right team to solve that problem?"Bitcoin and Ethereum are the most widespread by far.
Imagine them like theReserve Currency of the crypto world – if you wanted to invest in othercryptos, then you have to buy Bitcoin or Ethereum with your local currencyfirst.
Then you buy the other cryptocurrencies with your Bitcoin or Ethereum.If you don’t want to buy the cryptocurrencies themselves, you can always buya Bitcoin fund or Bitcoin tracker.
I did this for my daughter in her Junior ISA andit went up 98%, making her just under £2,000 in just three months.This might not seem like a lot of money but £2,000 in three months isn’t badfor an eight year old!What are the signs of a ‘bad’ cryptocurrencyAvoid these signs of a bad cryptocurrency1) Me-too coins – these are coins that do exactly the same as alreadyexisting coins and don’t really add any more benefits or USPs.
They arejust copying what has already been done.
Avoid these.
If, however, theyare sufficiently different and do the same but do it in a much better orfaster or cheaper way etc.
then it might be worth considering2) Coins for specific industries – what I mean by this is coins that aredesigned for just one market.
A perfect example is Potcoin.
I actuallybought some but I regret it now because all they are saying is “here is amarket and we are going to create a coin for this market so everyonecan use this coin to buy marijuana.” But in reality there is no real NEEDfor this coin.
It doesn’t solve any PROBLEMS.
You can use Bitcoin orMonero or Ethereum instead.
Worse still, there are other coins likeDopecoin, Cannabiscoin, Hempcoin doing the same thing.
Paragon, onthe other hand, is creating a platform for the Marijuana industry – I owntokens in Paragon too.403) Teams that are either too small or unqualified – in reality it is not easyto make a start up successful, and the competition is only going tointensify.
It is best to check out the backgrounds of the team and see ifthey really do have the experience to pull off what they are suggestingin their whitepaper.
Also, the team needs to be large enough to handlethis or at least they have to have plans to hire more relevant teammembers.
A one-man band or three people can’t dominate an industry.4) Low trading volume – it means that that not enough people are buyingand selling.
This is not a good sign.
You want to see ever-increasingvolume as the market is waking up to the opportunity.If you take care of the above then you should avoid the majority of coins thatare scams.417.
How to start buyingBitcoins, Ethereum andother AltcoinsGenerally, you have to buy Bitcoin or Ethereum with your fiat money first.Then you can buy other Altcoins with Bitcoin or Ethereum.There are two ways of buying Bitcoin – through an Exchange or Direct.1.
Exchangesa.
Fiat exchangeCryptocurrency exchanges are websites which allow you to buy, sell andexchange cryptocurrencies for other digital currencies or fiat currencies likeUSD or Euro.
Kraken is one of the largest.
When I started I used Gemini.The exchanges require you to open an account and verify your identification.Once you have exchanged fiat for Bitcoins, you can then either buy other coins,or in the case of Gemini, you have to then send your Bitcoins to Coinexchanges, like Poloniex, Bittrex or Coinbase (see below).b.
Coin Exchange42These are websites that connects buyers and sellers where they charge certainfees for a completed transaction.i.
ReputationBefore you start your exchange on your selected site, ensure you’ve gatheredsufficient information regarding the site such as reviews from professionaltraders as well as well-known industry websites.ii.
FeesMost exchanges will have fee-related information on their websites.
Beforejoining any sites, ensure you have understood the exchange jargons: deposit,transaction and withdrawal fees.
Fees may vary according to the exchange youchoose.iii.
Payment MethodsTake note of the payment method available.
Does the site use credit and debitcard? Wire transfer? PayPal? If a particular exchange has very limited paymentmethods then it may not be convenient for you.
Always remember thatpurchasing currencies via credit card will always require ID verification and itcomes with a premium price to increase the security measures.
Always checkthe fees for using credit or debit cards, as they can be very high.Meanwhile, purchasing cryptocurrency via wire transfer will take longer as ittakes time for banks to process.iv.
Verification RequirementsThe majority of Bitcoin’s trading platforms both in the US and the UK require aform of ID verification to make deposits and withdrawals.
Some exchanges willalso allow you to remain anonymous.
Bear in mind that verifications may takeseveral days but this is to protect exchanges from any sort of moneylaundering.v.
Exchange Rate43Do not be surprised that different exchanges offer different rates.
Therefore,always remember to shop around and to not immediately settle on anexchange.
This makes a big difference on your investment as cryptocurrencyrates are known to fluctuate in value up to 10% and even higher in somecircumstances.As cryptocurrency is gaining more attention around the globe, there is a vastarray of exchange platforms to choose from.
But not all exchange platformsare created equal.When I started I transferred GBP from my bank to a Fiat Exchange, like Geminiin USD, where I bought my Bitcoin.From there I would transfer money to my Coin Exchanges, Poloniex and/orBittrex.So I decided to open an account with an Exchange that was present in Europe,Kraken.
I could send my GBP direct in GBP to Kraken.
I would then exchangemy GBP for Bitcoin and then send it to either Poloniex or Bittrex.
RecentlyKraken stopped accepting GBP but people with Euros can still use it.c.
Examples of Coin Exchangesi.
Poloniex: this is the first one I ever used.44ii.
Bittrex: this is the second one I opened.Bittrex has one of the most numbers of coins to trade, that’s why Ilike it so much.
This is what Bittrex looks like once you have loggedin:iii.
Kraken: The third one I opened was Kraken.It is one of the largest exchanges in Europe.
Now that it no longeraccepts GBP I don’t find it as useful, however our Continentalfriends can still use it to send their Euros and purchase Bitcoin.Since the selection of other coins are limited however, unless youare thinking of just holding Bitcoin, Ethereum and some of theother larger coins, you will probably be sending your money toexchanges such as Bittrex or Poloniex.45iv.
Coinbase: this is the best known.
No idea why I haven't used it butI haven't :-)Actually while writing this book I realised that I probably shouldopen an account with Coinbase and have even made a video onhow to open the account for the members of our Crypto Club.46An important note: Opening these accounts is simple but it is not easy.
We areat the beginning of a new technology here.
Things are getting better but as abeginner it might seem very convoluted at first, some might say downrightconfusing.This is a GOOD thing.
It keeps the masses away while you and I get ourpositions.
Once the doors open, everyone will want to get in.
We will be in agreat position once that happens.
So be grateful that it is not easy to open anaccount, otherwise everyone would be doing it right now :-)2.
DirectOne of our traders here used www.localbitcoins.com to exchange GBP intoBitcoin (BTC).
“I found a seller selling BTC at a predetermined price, got myselfverified as per their instructions.
And then made a bank transfer to them.
TheBTC were held in escrow until payment was received.
As soon as the paymenthas been confirmed the BTC are released.
I then transferred my BTC from thesite into an exchange.”For an idea of UK exchanges, check out www.bittybot.co/uk for a list of all UKBitcoin exchanges and other exchanges which trade in British Pounds (GBP)ordered by ask price (lowest first).47As always, please do your own research and due diligence.488.
Which strategies do I use?“After spending many years in Wall Street and after makingand losing millions of dollars I want to tell you this: it neverwas my thinking that made the big money for me.
It alwayswas my sitting.
Got that? My sitting tight!”- Jesse Livermore, Millionaire TraderOnce we have opened up our accounts, we can start to invest in the coins.All you need now is a strategy.
Most people do not have a strategy which theyhave thought about in advance, written down and then follow to the letter.That is the biggest mistake of all.
Before we start getting into the strategy, hereare a few other mistakes you should try to avoid at all costs:Mistake 1:They invest in something they don’t really understand or believe in long term.Therefore, they are too easily tempted to sell if the price begins to fall in theshort term.To counteract this mistake, start by sticking to the major ones in terms ofmarket capitalisation ie top ten for safety first while you test the market(www.coinmarketcap.com).49If you want something a little bit more advanced with more gadgets but thatbasically does the same thing, then try www.coingecko.comSome people prefer Coingecko because it has its own rating system that takesmore information into consideration before ranking, whereas Coinmarketcaponly uses the market capitalisation to rank it.It is up to you which one you want to use but Coingecko does have morefunctionality:50Mistake 2:They think they have missed the boat on the most successful cryptocurrencies,whose price has run up – think Bitcoin and Ethereum – and so invest in lessestablished, smaller and more speculative coins just because the price is muchcheaper than that of Bitcoin and so have more of an upside.While you can put a small 10% of your money into speculation, the majority ofyour money needs to go into any of the pull-backs that occur on the moreestablished cryptocurrencies.
A pull-back is a fall in price significant enough forus to enter eg 10% from a recent high.Mistake 3:They try to day trade and profit from short term market movements, both upand down.While this can undoubtedly be profitable for someone who knows what theyare doing, this is absolutely lethal for anyone who doesn’t know proper riskmanagement and who doesn’t have a strategy or has a strategy without theproper risk:reward ratios.
Anyone who doesn’t have this is going to get killedby the volatility.51There are many different strategies you can use.
Fundamental analysis relieson data to determine the long term trend of the market and, therefore, thereis very little to do.
Technical analysis, on the other hand, is the study of shortterm movements in the price.Some people claim that technical analysis, often made up of a myriadcombination of hundreds of different chart patterns and indicators to help youenter the market, can give you an edge.Maybe.I particularly like the picture below where a trader makes fun of technicalanalysis.
It says “I have decided to brush up on TA (Technical Analysis) so I canbe an expert.
Looks like a Yeti pattern is forming.
I can confirm $150 pricetarget!” Hilarious!For people starting out, technical analysis can be confusing.
So what to do?The answer is: keep it simple.52What do to with a bull cryptocurrencyMy advice would be to do as little as possible and allow the market to do thework, especially in a bull market as we have now.
I am not advocating buy andhold.
Rather, to buy on the dips and sell 20-50% of your profit as it goes backup but hold on to the rest for when the big move comes.Take a look at the chart of Bitcoin below.
There were plenty of opportunities toget in on pull-back in the price and then to gradually sell on the way up.Just keep doing it.
Rinse and Repeat.
The only caveat, and it is a big caveat, isthat you do need to believe that it is going to continue up.If it stops going up, then you have to use the following strategy.What do to with a sideways or slightly down cryptocurrencyWhen starting out, we suggest you don’t try to time the market too much i.e.try to get in and out like a professional trader.
Use a simple yet effectivestrategy like Value Cost Average™ strategy.
The rules are as follows:53Buy the currency at when it has dropped -10% from a recent high and again at-20% from the recent high and again at -30% from the recent high.
Draw yourlines in advance, so you get in according to the strategy.
Make sure you arelooking at a chart which shows the crypto in relation to something stable, NOTin relation to Bitcoin.
If you can’t find that then write down the price at whichyou are going to enter in advance.
Each time increase the amount you areinvesting by not more than 25%.Remember that cryptocurrencies have massive volatility.
Do not get emotionalabout this.
Expect it.
Embrace it even.
Volatility is your friend so you can buy ata cheaper price.
While everyone else is panicking, you will be entering again.Take a look at the chart below of Monero (Ticker XMR)There were plenty of opportunities to buy on the pull-back and make a fairlyfast 10% with this strategy.
And Monero is one of the more stable ones.
Eventhe biggest cryptocurrency, Bitcoin, is EXTREMELY volatile.That is why these strategies work so well – because of the volatility ofcryptocurrencies.
See the following chart:54It shows Bitcoins’ major corrections.
A correction is more of fall then a merepull-back.
When you look at the % declines in Column 4 each time, you will seewhat we mean by volatility.
Let volatility be your friend.
Buy on the dips.Only use this strategy if you are sure your chosen coin cannot go to zero –stick to the top ten with the biggest market capitalisations.If you are investing more speculatively because you want to take on more riskto make more potential returns then you need to know what you are doing.This is not recommended for total beginners.
For example, you could buyothers Altcoins that aren’t in the top 10 or so.
But remember the further downthe list you go the more risk you are taking that it could go to zero.If you are taking on more risk then don't keep buying into it because if it goesto zero all your money will be gone.
Here you have to be clever.
Try onlybuying when it has dropped AND you see it going up again.But remember, this strategy can only work on something you believe will notgo to zero.
If you believe that Bitcoin or any other Altcoin can go to zero, donot employ this strategy.Never invest more than you are willing to lose entirely.
People always saythat but with cryptocurrencies I suggest you heed this advice.559.
How to keep yourcryptocurrencies safe andstore them“I threw away $7.6 Million of Bitcoin”- Campbell Simpson, who bought $25 worth of Bitcoin in 2010, put it on ahard drive but threw the hard drive away by mistake.To start investing in cryptocurrencies, the first thing you would need is to setup your digital wallet.
In the cryptocurrency realm, the term used is “wallet”.The wallet can be likened to a bank account, which can be stored in differentdevices.The reason you need to do this is because there are countless stories of peoplelosing their cryptocurrencies.
Safety is paramount here – you don’t want tobuild up a small fortune only to lose it all.A cryptocurrency wallet is a software program that functions to store yourprivate and public keys and interacts with various blockchains.
It enables usersto send and receive cryptocurrencies as well as tracking their balance.There are many wallets out there for you to choose from, which is alldependent on your security needs as well as whether you wish to be an activetrader or a more passive buy-and-hold investor (we recommend you be amixture of the two, the so-called sweet spot).Once you have set up your wallet, you can then proceed to purchase andexchange the digital currency of your choice on many platforms.There are three main ways to store your coins:561.
An exchange – this is the easiest way because you are trading yourmoney on there so that is where your money is kept.
However,remember that this is an unregulated entity and this is where most ofthe hacks have taken place.
So to date, exchanges have been the worstplace to keep your money.Make it even safer by using whatever extra security there is available.For example, Gemini asks not just for a password but asks if you want toenable ‘Two-Factor Authentication’ (2FA).
Do it! It makes it even safer.Use ‘Google Authenticator’ where possible as opposed to text messagingin case someone clones your phone.Some of the exchanges actually hold your coins in cold storage for you,so theoretically that sounds a little bit safer than just keeping it on anexchange that doesn’t offer that.2.
An online Wallet –a.k.a.
Hot Wallet.
This is more difficult to hack andtherefore safer than an exchange.
It can still be hacked, however, since itis online.
It also means more work because you have to open up severalwallets for each of the different coins.
This is a pain but do it.
Better tobe safe than sorry.There are two ways of doing this:1.
Ones that store your public key and your private key online and2.
Those that are set up online but then store your private keys on yourPC or mobile.1.
Online or Cloud WalletSome examples of these are www.MyEtherWallet.com (which I use) andwww.blockchain.info (which I have not used).57Once you used www.myetherwallet.com there is no turning back.
It isextremely simple to use, once you have used it a few times of course :--)2a.
Desktop PC/Mac WalletDepending on how secure your desktop is or isn’t, this is accessible by hackersi.e.
if your PC gets a virus then people can hack it to get your private keys.2b.
Mobile WalletThe best-known mobile wallet is Jaxx.
It syncs to your desktop and your phoneso that you can back up the private key.
You can download it from the AppStore or Google Play.
www.jaxx.io58Jaxx is great because it stores a lot of different coins all in one, like Bitcoin,Ethereum, Litecoin, Dash etc.3.
An offline Wallet a.k.a.
Cold storage or hard storage – this is whereyou store your private key on a special USB stick and so it is off grid.
Onceoffline, it is almost impossible to hack.
However, if the cleaner throws it out,you lose it for good.
And yes, this has happened with people losing$millions in hard disks that were thrown out by mistake.The most popular ones are:Trezor: this was the first original hard wallet.Like most of these technologies, they are SIMPLE to use but noteasy.
The first time it is like climbing a mountain – but every useafter that gets easier and easier.Before long you will be an absolute expert at it, showing off to allyour friends.
If you didn’t die climbing the mountain the first timearound, that is.Ledger Nano S: one of the most popular.The Ledger seems to be very popular with people.
It is almost thesame as the Trezor but looks cooler and is less expensive.
Isuppose those are two good reasons when buying something,especially since it pretty much does the same thing as the Trezor.59I went for the Trezor because it was more expensive (reassuringlyexpensive and all that) but now that I have been in the space for awhile, if I would start again I would probably go for the LedgerNano.KeepKey:Keepkey aas a larger screen but I have not used it myselfWith all of the above, you have to figure out your number that you thinkit is safer to put on there i.e.
any coins worth more than $25,000 in valueI use a cold storage wallet.4.
Paper Wallet.
This is where you literally write down your private keyon a piece of paper.
This is, of course, much cheaper than buying one ofthe above.Make sure you keep a copy because once the paper is destroyed yourprivate key is gone and your coins will be gone.With all the above, follow these three Rules:1.
Always back up your wallet, no matter which ones you use.2.
Keep your software up to date if using software.603.
Use whatever extra security there is available such as TwoFactor Authentication.
Use Google Authenticator wherepossible as opposed to text messaging in case someone clonesyour phone.Summary: If you are planning to trade with your money (not invest),then leave it on the exchange, but if you are planning to hold it longer termthen it is worth keeping it safe in a wallet.If you have larger investments – you need to decide what that means – itis definitely worth putting into cold storage.Better safe than sorry!6110.
How to track them onceyou have bought them?“If you can't measure it, you can't improve it.”- Management thinker Peter DruckerThere are several sites you can use to track your cryptocurrenciesonce you have bought them.The one that I use is www.cryptocompare.com.62You can either put in what you have bought manually or you cutand paste a code from the exchange in and it does itautomatically.
This way it has the fluctuations of all the coins on adaily basis:This is a great way to track all your holdings even if they are onseveral exchanges or several wallets.
You don’t want to be logginginto several exchanges every day – simply log into your ‘Portfolio’in CryptoCompare and everything you want is there.
If you haveseveral positions of the same coin, it will amalgamate it and giveyou the average price.Another one is www.Cointracking.info.63This has the added benefit of having a tax add on.
Again, you canenter coins directly from exchanges such as Bittrex, Coinbase,Kraken etc.6411.
How to make money i.e.when to sell them“The only people who lose money are the ones that have tosell.”- Warren BuffettThis, of course, is the holy grail of trading – WHEN to get out of the trade.We are at the beginning of cryptocurrencies as a technology, so there could beenormous upside potential.
We are looking at the maximum upside.
If there isone thing I have learned it is that you have to allow your winners to run if youwant to make a lot of money.
We are definitely holding for the long-termupside potential.In this bull market and in the Early Adopter stage of cryptocurrencies, I don’treally want to be selling.
Why? Unlike other investments, Bitcoin and othercryptocurrencies are currencies and, so if they succeed, you won’t have to sellthem to gain value from them.
You can use them directly, like you can theBritish Pound or any other form of currency.I am not even going to buy something with a stop loss to sell, as the volatility istoo huge at the moment.
I am not really looking at selling at all, since we are ina bull market and if I get out I will miss out on the big moves that comes whenyou least expect it.However, to just buy and hold is a pretty lazy strategy too.
You don’t want tobe up massively and then lose all the profits you made.
So we have to considertaking some profits now and again in order to take money off the table androtate it back into other cryptos that might be at a lower price.
For example, ifyou are in profit and have made over 100%, it is time to think about setting astop loss just below it to sell a part of your holdings and take some profit, say20-30%.65Another way to make money is a little more advanced and it means watching iton a daily basis if you see the price continuously going up and down i.e.
goingsideways and not really hitting new highs, then you can start to trade withinthat ‘channel’ of high and low prices.
So you are getting in near the bottomand out near the top – in effect trading – whilst always keeping your mainamount invested but start trading a smaller portion within that range.It is important to do this but most people do not do this.
If you don’t do thisthen you don’t make any money while markets go sideways which is crazywhen you consider that markets might go sideways for many months, evenyears on occasions.
If you don’t trade the range while waiting for the eventualupturn, you have missed out on that time … and profit.This is the optimal strategy but takes some experience.
Not a lot of experiencebut a little.Make sure you talk to one of our traders who can guide you and point you inthe right direction.6612.
Is it too late to get intocryptocurrencies – have Imissed the boat?Get in before the early adoption really starts.While it might be too late to make 10,000% on the larger coins, it is still veryearly on and new developments, coins and ideas are being generated almoston a daily basis.
We are just at the start.
There will no doubt be NEW cryptosthat will also have meteoric rises which you can get into.
Some haven’t evenbeen invented yet.
Anything could happen.
Get involved.Whether you are in the know and can buy in time is another matter altogether,so do your research and get going.A whole generation is looking at Bitcoin as a store of value.
The trust is in thedecentralised framework of the blockchain, which makes it so difficult to hackinto.
Anyone under the age of 30 sees Bitcoin as making total sense.There are generally four phases of adoption according to Everett M.
Rogers(1957)1.
Innovators2.
Early Adopters3.
Late Majority4.
Laggards67I believe that we are only now approaching the Early Adopter’s stage, so plentyof time to go.
At the moment only thousands of people own any Bitcoin or afraction of a Bitcoin.
This is akin to when only hundreds of thousands of peoplehad an iPhone.
The real growth came when it started being adopted byeveryone and then it grew into the high millions.
So get in before the earlyadoption really starts.Simon Dixon, CEO and co-founder of BNK to the Future, says that he has seenfive waves of cryptocurrencies:1.
The first wave was Bitcoin, which had value because of it being a store ofvalue independent of a central bank.2.
The second was the Altcoins where people were trying to copy Bitcoin.Some of them succeeded, like Litecoin and Dash.3.
Then you had equities in companies, like the exchanges Kraken andCoinbase.4.
Then there was Tokens or ‘ICOs’ as they are called, where companiescreate an asset class that trades on a secondary market.685.
The final one is ‘Forks’ – where people have disagreements on howthings should be done and split off, for example Ethereum Classic splitoff from Ethereum and Bitcoin Cash and Bitcoin Gold split off fromBitcoin.Let us take a look at ICOs in the next chapter.6913.
What is an ICO and howcan I profit from it?Let’s ICO like it’s 1999.* Important warning before we start: ICOs are a high-risk way of fundraising.Never invest anything you can’t completely afford to lose.
Keep in mind thatdue to a lack of regulation, you will have difficulty getting back your lost moneyin case of any failures.What is an ICO?An ICO (Initial Coin Offering) is a fundraising method that trades future cryptocoins for cryptocurrencies which have an immediate, liquid value.
Much as anIPO is an Initial Public Offering when a private company decides to go public onan Exchange, an ICO is an Initial Coin Offering.
ICOs or Initial Coin Offerings arebasically crowd sales, the cryptocurrency version of crowdfunding.The only difference is that in an ICO the startup sells tokens on a blockchainwhile IPO is selling shares.
It usually takes place before the launch of a coin’sblockchain, and involves the public sale, or crowdsale, of a percentage of thecoin’s initial supply.
ICOs are sometimes referred to as ICPOs (Initial Public CoinOfferings) or ITOs (Initial Token Offerings) or even a ‘Crypto Crowdsale’.
Thestartups themselves are called ‘Blockchain Startups’.Many of the companies performing ICOs aren’t offering coins, but rathertokens.
And tokens and coins are very different things.
Coins, like Bitcoin, are away of transferring monetary value.
Tokens, on the other hand, can storecomplex and multifaceted data streams that can be used for endlessfunctionality.70Many of the new companies that are holding ICOs are not currencies and areinstead technology companies that will be built on the blockchain.
So, theycan’t be judged solely on their monetary value, but rather they need to beevaluated based on their business model and potential solution.What is the so-called ‘white paper’ within an ICO?Every ICO should have a white paper or manifesto.
For example, the originalBitcoin white paper is at the back of this book (see appendices).
This detailshow the technology is intended to work, how the tokens are designed within it,and how users could acquire and use the tokens.
A white paper shows whetherthe founders have thought through the project, what problem it solves andhow they mean to solve it.
Crucially, it must also show how the tokens they aregiving out will be used to solve the problem, since you will own some inexchange for investing.How does an ICO work?1.
A startup advertises that it will be selling the initial coin supply of their newcryptocurrency.2.
Investors read the ‘white paper’ of the startup and on that basis exchangeBitcoin or Ether for these new coins.3.
The startup can then exchange your Bitcoin or Ether into normal fiatcurrency to spend on building out the technology, pay for costs etc.4.
If the project is a success, ie it launches and starts being adopted, then thevalue of the new currency rises and investors of the ICO make a profit.Why do companies do them?ICO provides them a simpler and quicker way to do fund-raising for newblockchain projects than a traditional method.
It is also border-free that it canconnect to every investor in the world.Usually, a percentage of the tokens is sold to ICO participants and a percentagekept for the company’s needs (private investors, etc.
Terms differ from one ICOto another).71Bancor raised $150 million in under 3 hours.
BAT raised $34 million in literallyunder a minute.
The ICOfor Status was in such a high demand that it jammedthe Ethereum network for an entire day.
The highest value raised by an ICO isTezos, which raised a record breaking $232 million in less than a month!How do you make money in an ICO?Most investors speculate that the startup will be successful enough to launchon an exchange, so that they can sell their tokens or coins as soon as possible,at profit.
They don’t necessarily believe in the company itself, or they mightbelieve in the idea, but are not willing to risk staying in for the long term if theycan make 100-1000% in the short term.What does the new token/coin represent?The coin/token issued in an ICO has three roles, depending on the goals of thecompany:72 It represents the company’s product – the coins can be used as a medium ofexchange for a certain amount of product or services.
It could also be usedfor trading in a project. It represents the right of profit sharing – like normal shares, the coins couldbe thought of a certain percent of a company’s shares you own and profitscould be shared if the company wishes to do so. It represents corporate bonds – the coin is like a loan.
The coin owner isable to receive interest based on the pre-set rate.Those that believe in the company will hold on for the long term.
If the startupis successful, fortunes will be made.
Even if you invest just £500-5,000.
This isunprecedented.Are there drawbacks to investing in ICOs?Yes, there are many.The idea for the startup is written on a ‘white paper’ – often even without anyproof of work – and people invest on the basis of what they read in the whitepaper.
Since investors are pouring in their money in the hope of becoming richthrough ICOs, some of these ICO startups are taking advantage of thissituation.
They collect the money but don’t actually get to the work of creatingthe product, yet alone actually turning the business into a profit-makingenterprise.
Then they just disappear into the ether.Mycelium ICO was a particularly bad example of this.
Its team members justdisappeared after raising the money, and later it was reported they used thefunds to pay for their own vacation.This is why there is so much talk of regulation and self-regulation.The ones that are legitimate and really do want to create a product may havethe problem of insufficient technical knowledge or support.
They may beunderqualified and lack the experience of building up a blockchain business.73This is not the only way investors have lost money.
$7 millions were stolen asCoinDash’s ICO started.
Right before the start of the token sale, their websitewas hacked and the ICO wallet address was changed to the hacker’s address.How do I go about investing in an ICO?1.
Research, research, researchUnlike an IPO where the company is normally successful and profitable, an ICOis a startup and needs the funds to get from the white paper theory to developthe actual product or service.
So you must do your research by trawling theInternet and asking all your questions on ICO, cryptocurrencies and Bitcoinforums.
Remember, you could lose 100% of your investment.1.
Can the team deliver based on its experience?Read their white paper and go straight to the founding members and the team.Look at their profiles on LinkedIn.
See how much history they have in the space– we are looking for people who can deliver on their promise.
If not, don’teven bother continuing.
Find out if the team has any crypto experience and –more importantly – which projects, or ICOs, they were involved with and theimpact they had.
If you are satisfied that they can deliver, continue yourresearch.Take a short cut and go to BitcoinTalk.org, because you can see what theexperienced investors are saying.74Watch out for the words like ‘scam’ and how the community responds.
Givemore weight to the answers of experienced investors.
Investor’s concerns willbe answered (or may be unanswered) in this thread.Also, it is a bad sign when the developers avoid answering certain questions oraren’t collaborating.
Sending them a personal message to see how responsivethey are is also a good idea.2.
Does the idea solve a problem/is the idea needed?Is there any validity in their idea? Is it solving a problem? Is there a potentialhungry market for this? Does it have a chance of succeeding? What does yourgut instinct and experience tell you? After reading it, you should be able toanswer a simple question – what kind of value does this project bring to ourworld?Next, is it a totally new concept or are they developing something thatsomeone else already has developed.
Don’t get duped into a new Amazon forthis new market or an Uber of that new market.
It can’t just be a ‘me-too’product – don’t invest unless you believe that this company can do it muchbetter.753.
What is the Token for?ICOs mean the creation of a new dedicated token for the project.
One of themost important questions each project needs to answer is what is the tokenfor? Why isn’t Bitcoin or Ethereum enough to serve as the project’s token?4.
How much money is being collected?Some of the earlier ICOs were unlimited.
An open cap allows investors to sendunlimited funding to the project’s ICO wallet.
The more coins are circulating,the less unique your tokens become for trading afterwards – through lessdemand.5.
What are they using the money for?Next, what are they using the money for? What percentage will go to thedevelopment budget, the marketing budget, and other essential allocations.
Inthe past, many ICOs have not given this level of transparency but in the enddon’t you want to know where your money is going to be allocated to and ifthis makes sense to you?6.
Token valueNext, look at the Token value – is the current value worth it? Do you think ithas a chance of growing in value to make you enough profits? Do they havetoo many tokens on offer which will saturate the market? Are there really anyincentives to use their tokens – because in the end, even if it is a great idea,you will only make money if the tokens you have will increase in value overtime? Etc.If you can answer these questions as best you can, then you have done thework required to lower the risk of investing.
Remember that your risk is 100%and with several of them, this is likely to happen.7.
Token distribution – when and how76Greed can be defined by a high token distribution to the team members, let’ssay, more than 50% of the tokens is suspicious.
A good project will link itstoken distribution to the roadmap,because each phase or milestone of theproject requires a certain amount of funding.Watch for the token distribution stage.
Some projects just release their tokenshours after the ICO has ended.
Some projects need to develop a beta versionbefore sending out the tokens.
This is good to know but doesn’t necessarilyhave to impact your investment decision2.
Exchange your fiat money for cryptocurrencyYou will need cryptocurrency, usually Bitcoin or Ethereum, to participate in anICO.
Remember the startup will then exchange your investment money for fiatmoney to pay for its development, costs etc.3.
Invest in ICOSimply send the cryptocurrency the startup asks for to the address they askyou to send it to.
Please note that most startups won’t accept Bitcoin or Etherfrom an exchange.
Several exchanges won’t send Bitcoin or Ether to an ICOstartup.
Normally it is sent from an online wallet e.g.
www.myetherwallet.com4.
Follow the development of the startupMany people just leave their money in the startup and pray it all works out.
Iam not one of those people.
I try to get involved and see if I can help.
After all,this is my money I have invested and I want to ensure that it works for me.
Ieven spent six months in a startup manning the phones.
Tell everyone about it,be a walking, talking advertisement for them.
You just never know the impactthis could have.Remember, investment in cryptocurrency isn’t something to be taken lightly.It’s extremely risky, extremely speculative, and extremely early stage still atthis point in time.I have now invested in over 30 ICOs.
I am spreading my risk because I don’tknow which of them will be successful, if any.
This is pure speculation.
But I77also swore that I would not miss out on what so far looks like a once in ageneration opportunity.I attend as many conferences as I can so I can talk to the team.
I read thewhitepaper.
I might send them an email to see how they react.I have even managed to get in on a pre-sale where it is possible to getdiscounts.
They were asking for a minimum of 100 ETH but when I remindedthem that we had met at the conference and of the conversation we had, theycame down to 50 and then finally 25 ETH.Morale of the story?If you don’t ask you don’t get.And attend conferences to meet the team.
There’s only so much you can gleanfrom a Whitepaper.7814.
Asset allocation – howmuch to invest incryptocurrencies?Overall, there is a school of thought that says that investing in ICOs is notinvesting at all – it is pure speculation and it is best to wait until after the ICO ieafter the coins have gone public.
I certainly agree with the first part of thatstatement – it is speculation to invest in a brand new startup that hasn’t evenbuilt its product at the start of a new technology revolution.
I also agree thatyou would be better of looking at the ones that have gone public as they havemore chance of not being scams.However, I don’t believe that is all we should be doing.
I believe that in termsof asset allocation a tiny amount of your portfolio should be invested on ICOsbecause the returns could be gigantic.
So what’s the ideal percentage? Thiswill, of course, depend on how old you are, how much risk you are willing totake and how aggressive/conservative you want to be.
However, for me, it isthe following:In terms of asset allocation I am looking at putting 5% of my capital into ICOs.The reason is that we have no idea:1.
Where this industry is heading.2.
Which ICOs are going to be successful.Therefore investing in ICOs is EXTREMELY speculative.However.
I am still open to putting in a small amount every month, say £500+.I am looking to spread my risk among a minimum of 20 different ICOs.
I will putmore in if I have met the people and get a good feeling about it, or the whitepaper makes a lot of sense and it is really solving a problem and has the team79to build the required solution.
So if I bought into 20 of them and they all failedbut one of them exploded, then I would risk £10,000 to make £50,000 or evenmore.For example, I might invest:0.5% of my capital into an ICO where I am not sure but want to be in because Idon’t want to miss out.1-1.5% of my capital into an ICO where I feel good about it.2.5-5% of my capital into an ICO where I really have a very good feel about theproblem, solution and the team.The most I have invested into one ICO is 12.5% of my crypto capital.
This wasat the beginning of my journey and it was, in hindsight, too much in terms ofasset allocation.Let’s break this down:25% = £2,500 into the top 2 Ethereum/Bitcoin.40% = £4,000 into established coins e.g.
top 20.20% = £2,000 into up and coming coins ie outside the top 20 but coming upfast.10% = £1,000 into new coins that have gone public onto an exchange.5% = £500 into ICOs.100% TotalThis is just a guideline on what I am doing – you need to come up with yourown system that works for you.Remember that this 100% is the 100% of the total of my pot allocated tocryptocurrencies.
Since cryptocurrencies are speculative, this ‘100%’shouldn’t be more than 10% of your entire portfolio.
So if you lost the entire100% then you would have only lost 10% of your portfolio.
Again, none of usknow what the future is of cryptocurrencies (see next chapters).
Buyerbeware!8015.
Are there any drawbacksto investing incryptocurrencies?“Where there’s blockchain there’s also bullshit”Overheard at a Blockchain ConferenceThere are several drawbacks to cryptocurrencies, especially with ICOs.
This is atotally new and unregulated industry, meaning if you are hacked and someonetakes your Bitcoins, you will not be compensated.
Also, new launches of coinsare increasing and no one knows which ones will vanish and which ones arehere to stay.
Due to this uncertainty, price swings of 30%+ in a single day up ordown are not uncommon.
Therefore, at the moment, only invest money youare willing to lose.Overall, there are four disadvantages of cryptocurrencies.
There is a lack ofunderstanding towards this digital currency.
Plus, there’s minimum protectionand guarantee when using is.
Because it is mostly operating online, it is boundto experience all kinds of technical flaws and it is still developing.1.
Lack of understanding about cryptocurrencyIn most cases, people are still unaware of the digital currency world and thepotential it holds.
This is similar to when the usage of credit card was firstannounced and the reception towards it was fairly similar to cryptocurrency.Back then, people wouldn’t even think that paying for things using a mere cardwas possible, yet alone a whole new digital currency.Because it is different, and it doesn’t involve cash directly, people shy awayfrom it and constantly doubt its effectiveness.
Additionally, it involves onlineaccess to make it work.
The idea of having to pay for things or transfer moneyonline is convenient to some and is catching on but some people are stillsceptical about it.81In order to make cryptocurrency acceptable around us, the people need to beeducated about it to be able to include it in their daily lives.
But the effort tolearn a whole new world of currency requires a lot of time and energy.
Mostwould think it is not worth their time because it is not commonly knownanyway.Even though some businesses are accepting Bitcoins, the list is significantlysmall compared to traditional currencies.
This is probably due to the lack ofknowledge.
Both businesses and customers need to be educated.
Imaginehaving to teach your customers a new way of paying for something.
This willtake a longer time and effort.2.
Lack of consumer protection and guaranteeIn the case of traditional currency, Central Banks govern the authority of anation’s money.
No higher authority can suddenly decide that they no longerwant to use their country’s currency to trade without protest and rejection.There are procedures to follow, documents to file, approvals and many otherprotocols to follow.However, that is not the case with our digital currency.
There is no CentralBank who governs Bitcoin, which means no one can guarantee its minimumvaluation.The value of Bitcoin, for example, will fall tremendously should a major groupof merchants decided to just ‘discard’ Bitcoins and leave the system.
This willinevitably leave other users who have invested thousands of dollars intoBitcoins in a major loss position.
There is no one to contact to file these losses,or rules to help compensate it.Another example is that if you get charged but didn’t receive the online movietickets or flight tickets, you can always call bank service provider, or go to thephysical bank instead and declare your case.
If you pay via Visa and can proveyou didn’t get your service, the credit card company will give you your moneyback.
I remember paying £2,000 for a course that was not delivered – the guyjust ran away with our money.
Visa compensated us fully because we usedtheir credit card.
I was actually pretty impressed at the time … and horrified, asI can imagine a lot of people putting in false claims.82That is not how it works with cryptocurrency.
First of all, this currency does nothave a bank to negotiate and help you.
There is no number that you could calland ask to speak to someone or email address.So, if you bought your goods using Bitcoins, for example, and the merchantdidn’t send the items you purchased, there is nothing you can do to reversethe transaction or refund.
You can’t complain to the police or any relatingauthority for that matter.Cryptocurrency transactions are typically not reversible.
Once you have sentthe money to an address you can’t get it back.
So make sure you double checkthat you are sending coins to the right address and in the right currency.Therefore, the very appeal of the decentralised system of Bitcoin is a doubleedged sword.3.
Technical shortcomingsWhen online banking made its way into our lives, there was always the risk of asudden server failure, power shortage, and even hardware lags.Similar to data corruptions or virus infections, if your hard drive crashes andyour wallet file is corrupted your Bitcoin is lost forever.
There is nothing youcan you do restore it and those ‘coins’ will be ‘orphaned’ in the system.So remember, always make a back-up to prevent this from happening.4.
The industry is still developingWhen things are still developing, they are prone to many risks.
There are somany incomplete features that can be improved but it takes a longer time tofinalise them, especially if they have no physical form.With traditional currency, despite the method of payments being performedonline, and without us actually seeing the physical money being transferredfrom one account to another, we still end up holding the physical cash at theend of the day.
We can use the physical cash to buy things from the stores,physically and online.Since cryptocurrency does not have any physical form i.e.
we will never beholding the physical cash, its usage is obviously restricted.83In the end it more often than not – and I hope this changes soon – but Bitcoinneeds to be converted to traditional currency to enjoy its worth.8416.
The future ofcryptocurrencyLunatic fringe or serious business?I do think cryptocurrency is here to stay.
To suggest otherwise would be likesaying the Internet was a fad when it first started.
Of course, hindsight is agreat thing.Which cryptos are here to stay, however, is almost impossible to guess.These digital currencies have been said to be able to capture the world ofonline finance.
With the blockchain technology behind it, the future ofcryptocurrency is showing enormous potential.Although the mechanism behind Ether prevents it from being used as a directpayment method, this cryptocurrency seems to have a bright future ahead.This is all thanks to its smart contract concepts.On the other hand, cryptocurrencies solving the problem of privacy are startingto gain more prominent favour amongst users.The growing level of acceptance of Bitcoin is clearly bringing this alternativecurrency to the mainstream.
Some companies are genuinely consideringinvesting in this currency, further fuelling its journey to the world of financialcurrency.Consider this:Ten times more money was raised for ICOs than Venture Capital in 2017.More than 50 Funds concentrating on cryptocurrencies have sprung up.All major VS are now on board and investing before ICOs.Countries such as Japan have even formally accepted it as a currency.85However, we need to differentiate between cryptocurrencies and theblockchain.
Cryptocurrencies have entered a speculation phase where peoplewant to make 1000% within days of buying a coin.
But that means we aredeparting from the fundamental assumption of what a cryptocurrencyoriginally is – a scarce digital commodity where the value derives from thatscarcity.Simply put, if more than 100 new sources of this digital commodity have beenlaunched since the summer of 2017, then the entire concept of scarcity, andtherefore value, begins to erode.
In fact, many of these new cryptocurrencieswill need to fail in order to maintain the viability of the best-known currencies,Bitcoin and Ether.Most of the recent ICOs are based on the ERC-20 Ethereum token, and theprimary purchasing mechanism for new cryptocurrencies has been Ether, thecurrency of the Ethereum network.Therefore, an investor often needs to buy Ether in order to buy into any of thenew ICOs.But the crypto bubble of lesser-known currencies will have to pop at somestage, and some people are going to get burned.
Despite this, the coretechnology behind it all – the blockchain – will provide value as a hiddeninfrastructure underlying future applications.A small number of currencies – likely Bitcoin and Ethereum – and utility tokenswhere genuine value is created, will remain viable over the long term –although at what price no one knows.It is interesting to note that the Enterprise Ethereum Alliance is gainingtraction.
The Enterprise Ethereum Alliance (EEA), the world’s largest opensource blockchain initiative, is an industry-supported consortium that aims tobring Ethereum to an enterprise-grade level by supporting, promoting, andbuilding Ethereum-based technologies.
The Alliance has recently announcedthe addition of 48 new members, including Sberbank, Russia’s largest bank,and Hewlett Packard Enterprise (HPE).86Governments are going to be embracing the power of the blockchain.Microsoft Opens Blockchain Door to the government.
Companies likeMicrosoft are working with government organisations: “Blockchain makes itmuch harder for fraud and waste to exist, makes it much more visible if it doesexist and potentially gets rid of a lot of layers of bureaucracy that are designedsimply to ensure that waste and fraud [don't] exist." MicrosoftAre we going to witness a new norm of currency through cryptocurrency oneday? Researchers concluded that it is still too early to predict that it would, butone thing is for sure that this currency is slowly making its way in the world.The most targeted group of all would be the technologically savvy individualsand most of us are already part of this group.
Less than 50% of our time isspent online and this % is growing.One day, we might even consider using cryptocurrency as our standardcurrency for a more universal transaction.8717.
CryptocurrencyFrequently AskedQuestions (FAQs)The New Liquid Gold?Why is Bitcoin called ‘Liquid Gold’?Money in itself does not have any intrinsic value – it is only because we believethat it has value that it is worth anything.
Money is just a tracking system – wetrack what we own and what we owe.
This is called a ledger.
Whatever form ofmoney exists, we give it value because of its utility as a ledger (or trackingsystem of who owes what).Gold has been the Standard for over 5,000 years.
Then came coins in differentmetals and finally paper money.
All paper money was backed up by real Gold,so real Gold equivalent to the amount of money on the paper had to be storedin the bank.
That means if someone were to go the bank and ask to exchangetheir money for Gold, in theory they would have received it.
All this haschanged.
After Nixon abandoned the ‘Gold Standard’ in 1971, the US Dollarwas cut loose from Gold.
Other countries followed suit.Governments were now free to print as much of it as they wanted, as it didn’tneed to be backed up by Gold.
Banks started lending out 5-10 times theamount of money that savers put into their bank accounts.
All this causedmore and more money to be placed in circulation.
This is called ‘fiat’ money.Unfortunately the more fiat money is being printed ie to fund a war, pay backdebt or pump into the economy to stave off a recession, the less value it has.Meaning that the money in your pocket is worth less and less every single year.88So really it would make more sense to use something that holds its value, likeGold for example, and not fiat currency.
Gold only has value because it isscarce – it is becoming increasingly difficult to mine and supply is running out.Until Bitcoin and the blockchain, Gold had made for the best form of a ledgerdevised.
The problem is that Gold cannot easily be used for daily buying andselling because it is difficult to store, divide up and send.This is where Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies come in, because they areeasy to store, divide up and send.The 5 characteristics of money1.Scarcity2.Divisible3.Transportable4.Durable5.Recognisable5 characteristicsof moneyFiat money Gold Bitcoin andcryptocurrenciesScarcity NO.More and morecan get printedevery day andthe value isfalling.YES.
YES.Bitcoin yes,because therewill only be 21million.Divisible YES.
NO.You can’t payfor a cup of teawith Gold.YES.One ‘Satoshi’ isone hundredmillionth of aBitcoin.Transportable YES.Using electronicmoney systemsthis is possible,NO.You can’t easilysend Goldoverseas inYES.You can send itlike a digital file,to another wallet89but it isexpensive andslow.bulk.
within a fewminutes, for afraction of theprice.Durable SOME.Coins yes butnot notes.
Newones have to beprinted everyyear.YES.It is extremelydurable.YES.You cannotdestroy a Bitcoin.Recognisable YES – ifeveryone in thatcountryrecognises it,butNO – if youare trying to payin your owncountry’scurrency, theneach countrywill have its owncurrency so youhave toexchange it,meaning costsand time.They are alsocopied andcounterfeitedand that is whyevery few yearsnew hologramsand materialsare added.YES.Some countriesactually preferthe relativesafety of Gold.NO – it is notaccepted as amethod ofpayment inmost places.It is not easy tocopy Gold buthow do youreally knowthat the Goldyou arereceiving isreal?YES.If you have aBitcoin walletthen that’s allyou are allowedto put in it.NO – the majorityof shops do notyet acceptBitcoin, but thelist is growingevery day.You cannot copya Bitcoin andcounterfeit it.90This means that Bitcoin, like Gold, is an inflation-proof store of value.
However,unlike Gold, it is ALSO a day-to-day transactable currency as well, as it is easilydivisible to any desired amount.
You can buy biscuits, pay for your utility billsor buy a Tesla car (which you have been able to do using Bitcoin since 2013).All that needs to happen now is that Bitcoin needs to gain awareness so thatpeople can use it to buy and sell on a daily basis.
This is going to take time.Remember when credit cards first came out – it took time for people to usethem.
Or using the automatic scanning systems at WH Smith or Tesco’s?People don’t like change, unless they can see the benefits clearly and it ischeaper.
Bitcoin fits the bill.What is Bitcoin Cash and Bitcoin Gold?In August 2017 a group of miners split off from Bitcoin to create Bitcoin Cash,in the way Ethereum Classic was created by a group splitting off fromEthereum in July 2015.In October 2017 a group of miners did the same to create Bitcoin Gold.This is what is called a Hard Fork.
A group of miners ‘forked’ from the mainBitcoin blockchain by switching to a new version of software with greatertransaction capacity.This fork did not affect Bitcoin balances, but millions of Bitcoin users were alsogiven Bitcoin Cash Tokens and in October Bitcoin Gold Tokens as well.Is there a difference between a Coin and a Token and if so, what is it?The term “ICO” is now used for any new Coin or Token that comes on themarket.
However, this is not correct.
Coins and Tokens are two very differentthings.
A Coin (or Altcoin) is a variation of Bitcoin's open source code.
(Litecoinor Dogecoin are examples of this).
A Token on the other hand is a secondaryasset for Decentralised Application (DApps) within a blockchain ecosystem –91usually Ethereum.
Each DApp uses tokens to run.
(Golem is a DecentralisedApplication within the Ethereum blockchain system.
Its secondary asset is aToken called GNT.
The Gnosis Token is GNO, etc.).Confused? Maybe this will help.
Bitcoin is a decentralised – not centralised –distributed ledger that performs best as digital money.
Bitcoin’s consensusprocess is revolutionary but you can’t build much with it.
Ethereum, on theother hand, can do what Bitcoin does … and more.
It can be digital money too,but unlike Bitcoin, Ethereum is highly programmable — it’s designed toaccommodate the construction of complex applications.
This is where theTokens come in.
A token can do many things while a coin can only do onething.
Coins really only have one utility — to act as simple stores of value withno other functionality.
Tokens are a completely different breed all together.They can store complex, multi-faceted levels of value.
Ethereum tokens aregenerated by a Smart Contract System (SCS), are highly programmable andhave multi-functionality because of it.
Through their functionality they becomemuch more than just a coin – they become “Tokens”...Bitcoin produces “coins.” Ethereum generates “tokens.” An “ICO” is aBitcoin/Altcoin thing.
A “Token Launch” is an Ethereum thing.
People aremixing up the two and until there is more regulation, it will continue to bemixed up.92Appendix:Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash SystemSatoshi Nakamotosatoshin@gmx.comwww.bitcoin.orgAbstract.
A purely peer-to-peer version of electronic cash would allow online payments to be sentdirectly from one party to another without going through a financial institution.
Digital signaturesprovide part of the solution, but the main benefits are lost if a trusted third party is still required toprevent double-spending.
We propose a solution to the double-spending problem using a peer-to-peernetwork.
The network timestamps transactions by hashing them into an ongoing chain of hash-basedproof-of-work, forming a record that cannot be changed without redoing the proof-of-work.
Thelongest chain not only serves as proof of the sequence of events witnessed, but proof that it came fromthe largest pool of CPU power.
As long as a majority of CPU power is controlled by nodes that arenot cooperating to attack the network, they'll generate the longest chain and outpace attackers.
Thenetwork itself requires minimal structure.
Messages are broadcast on a best effort basis, and nodes canleave and rejoin the network at will, accepting the longest proof-of-work chain as proof of whathappened while they were gone.1.
IntroductionCommerce on the Internet has come to rely almost exclusively on financial institutions serving astrusted third parties to process electronic payments.
While the system works well enough for mosttransactions, it still suffers from the inherent weaknesses of the trust based model.
Completely nonreversible transactions are not really possible, since financial institutions cannot avoid mediatingdisputes.
The cost of mediation increases transaction costs, limiting the minimum practical transactionsize and cutting off the possibility for small casual transactions, and there is a broader cost in the lossof ability to make non-reversible payments for non-reversible services.
With the possibility ofreversal, the need for trust spreads.
Merchants must be wary of their customers, hassling them formore information than they would otherwise need.
A certain percentage of fraud is accepted asunavoidable.
These costs and payment uncertainties can be avoided in person by using physicalcurrency, but no mechanism exists to make payments over a communications channel without atrusted party.What is needed is an electronic payment system based on cryptographic proof instead of trust,allowing any two willing parties to transact directly with each other without the need for a trustedthird party.
Transactions that are computationally impractical to reverse would protect sellers fromfraud, and routine escrow mechanisms could easily be implemented to protect buyers.
In this paper,we propose a solution to the double-spending problem using a peer-to-peer distributed timestampserver to generate computational proof of the chronological order of transactions.
The system issecure as long as honest nodes collectively control more CPU power than any cooperating group ofattacker nodes.2.
TransactionsWe define an electronic coin as a chain of digital signatures.
Each owner transfers the coin to the nextby digitally signing a hash of the previous transaction and the public key of the next owner and addingthese to the end of the coin.
A payee can verify the signatures to verify the chain of ownership.93The problem of course is the payee can't verify that one of the owners did not double-spend the coin.A common solution is to introduce a trusted central authority, or mint, that checks every transactionfor double spending.
After each transaction, the coin must be returned to the mint to issue a new coin,and only coins issued directly from the mint are trusted not to be double-spent.
The problem with thissolution is that the fate of the entire money system depends on the company running the mint, withevery transaction having to go through them, just like a bank.We need a way for the payee to know that the previous owners did not sign any earlier transactions.For our purposes, the earliest transaction is the one that counts, so we don't care about later attemptsto double-spend.
The only way to confirm the absence of a transaction is to be aware of alltransactions.
In the mint based model, the mint was aware of all transactions and decided whicharrived first.
To accomplish this without a trusted party, transactions must be publicly announced [1],and we need a system for participants to agree on a single history of the order in which they werereceived.
The payee needs proof that at the time of each transaction, the majority of nodes agreed itwas the first received.3.
Timestamp ServerThe solution we propose begins with a timestamp server.
A timestamp server works by taking a hashof a block of items to be timestamped and widely publishing the hash, such as in a newspaper orUsenet post [2-5].
The timestamp proves that the data must have existed at the time, obviously, inorder to get into the hash.
Each timestamp includes the previous timestamp in its hash, forming achain, with each additional timestamp reinforcing the ones before it.4.
Proof-of-Work94To implement a distributed timestamp server on a peer-to-peer basis, we will need to use a proof ofwork system similar to Adam Back's Hashcash [6], rather than newspaper or Usenet posts.
The proofof-work involves scanning for a value that when hashed, such as with SHA-256, the hash begins withnumber of zero bits.
The average work required is exponential in the number of zero bits required andcan be verified by executing a single hash.For our timestamp network, we implement the proof-of-work by incrementing a nonce in the blockuntil a value is found that gives the block's hash the required zero bits.
Once the CPU effort has beenexpended to make it satisfy the proof-of-work, the block cannot be changed without redoing the work.As later blocks are chained after it, the work to change the block would include redoing all the blocksafter it.The proof-of-work also solves the problem of determining representation in majority decision making.If the majority were based on one-IP-address-one-vote, it could be subverted by anyone able toallocate many IPs.
Proof-of-work is essentially one-CPU-one-vote.
The majority decision isrepresented by the longest chain, which has the greatest proof-of-work effort invested in it.
If amajority of CPU power is controlled by honest nodes, the honest chain will grow the fastest andoutpace any competing chains.
To modify a past block, an attacker would have to redo the proof-ofwork of the block and all blocks after it and then catch up with and surpass the work of the honestnodes.
We will show later that the probability of a slower attacker catching up diminishesexponentially as subsequent blocks are added.To compensate for increasing hardware speed and varying interest in running nodes over time,the proof-of-work difficulty is determined by a moving average targeting an average number ofblocks per hour.
If they're generated too fast, the difficulty increases.5.
NetworkThe steps to run the network are as follows:1) New transactions are broadcast to all nodes.2) Each node collects new transactions into a block.3) Each node works on finding a difficult proof-of-work for its block.4) When a node finds a proof-of-work, it broadcasts the block to all nodes.5) Nodes accept the block only if all transactions in it are valid and not already spent.6) Nodes express their acceptance of the block by working on creating the next block in thechain, using the hash of the accepted block as the previous hash.Nodes always consider the longest chain to be the correct one and will keep working on extending it.If two nodes broadcast different versions of the next block simultaneously, some nodes may receiveone or the other first.
In that case, they work on the first one they received, but save the other branchin case it becomes longer.
The tie will be broken when the next proof-of-work is found and onebranch becomes longer; the nodes that were working on the other branch will then switch to thelonger one.95New transaction broadcasts do not necessarily need to reach all nodes.
As long as they reach manynodes, they will get into a block before long.
Block broadcasts are also tolerant of dropped messages.If a node does not receive a block, it will request it when it receives the next block and realizes itmissed one.6.
IncentiveBy convention, the first transaction in a block is a special transaction that starts a new coin owned bythe creator of the block.
This adds an incentive for nodes to support the network, and provides a wayto initially distribute coins into circulation, since there is no central authority to issue them.
Thesteady addition of a constant of amount of new coins is analogous to gold miners expending resourcesto add gold to circulation.
In our case, it is CPU time and electricity that is expended.The incentive can also be funded with transaction fees.
If the output value of a transaction is less thanits input value, the difference is a transaction fee that is added to the incentive value of the blockcontaining the transaction.
Once a predetermined number of coins have entered circulation, theincentive can transition entirely to transaction fees and be completely inflation free.The incentive may help encourage nodes to stay honest.
If a greedy attacker is able to assemble moreCPU power than all the honest nodes, he would have to choose between using it to defraud people bystealing back his payments, or using it to generate new coins.
He ought to find it more profitable toplay by the rules, such rules that favour him with more new coins than everyone else combined, thanto undermine the system and the validity of his own wealth.7.
Reclaiming Disk SpaceOnce the latest transaction in a coin is buried under enough blocks, the spent transactions before it canbe discarded to save disk space.
To facilitate this without breaking the block's hash, transactions arehashed in a Merkle Tree [7][2][5], with only the root included in the block's hash.
Old blocks can thenbe compacted by stubbing off branches of the tree.
The interior hashes do not need to be stored.A block header with no transactions would be about 80 bytes.
If we suppose blocks are generatedevery 10 minutes, 80 bytes * 6 * 24 * 365 = 4.2MB per year.
With computer systems typically sellingwith 2GB of RAM as of 2008, and Moore's Law predicting current growth of 1.2GB per year, storageshould not be a problem even if the block headers must be kept in memory.8.
Simplified Payment Verification96It is possible to verify payments without running a full network node.
A user only needs to keep acopy of the block headers of the longest proof-of-work chain, which he can get by querying networknodes until he's convinced he has the longest chain, and obtain the Merkle branch linking thetransaction to the block it's timestamped in.
He can't check the transaction for himself, but by linkingit to a place in the chain, he can see that a network node has accepted it, and blocks added after itfurther confirm the network has accepted it.As such, the verification is reliable as long as honest nodes control the network, but is morevulnerable if the network is overpowered by an attacker.
While network nodes can verify transactionsfor themselves, the simplified method can be fooled by an attacker's fabricated transactions for as longas the attacker can continue to overpower the network.
One strategy to protect against this would be toaccept alerts from network nodes when they detect an invalid block, prompting the user's software todownload the full block and alerted transactions to confirm the inconsistency.
Businesses that receivefrequent payments will probably still want to run their own nodes for more independent security andquicker verification.9.
Combining and Splitting ValueAlthough it would be possible to handle coins individually, it would be unwieldy to make a separatetransaction for every cent in a transfer.
To allow value to be split and combined, transactions containmultiple inputs and outputs.
Normally there will be either a single input from a larger previoustransaction or multiple inputs combining smaller amounts, and at most two outputs: one for thepayment, and one returning the change, if any, back to the sender.97It should be noted that fan-out, where a transaction depends on several transactions, and thosetransactions depend on many more, is not a problem here.
There is never the need to extract acomplete standalone copy of a transaction's history.10.PrivacyThe traditional banking model achieves a level of privacy by limiting access to information to theparties involved and the trusted third party.
The necessity to announce all transactions publiclyprecludes this method, but privacy can still be maintained by breaking the flow of information inanother place: by keeping public keys anonymous.
The public can see that someone is sending anamount to someone else, but without information linking the transaction to anyone.
This is similar tothe level of information released by stock exchanges, where the time and size of individual trades, the"tape", is made public, but without telling who the parties were.As an additional firewall, a new key pair should be used for each transaction to keep them from beinglinked to a common owner.
Some linking is still unavoidable with multi-input transactions, whichnecessarily reveal that their inputs were owned by the same owner.
The risk is that if the owner of akey is revealed, linking could reveal other transactions that belonged to the same owner.11.CalculationsWe consider the scenario of an attacker trying to generate an alternate chain faster than the honestchain.
Even if this is accomplished, it does not throw the system open to arbitrary changes, such ascreating value out of thin air or taking money that never belonged to the attacker.
Nodes are not goingto accept an invalid transaction as payment, and honest nodes will never accept a block containingthem.
An attacker can only try to change one of his own transactions to take back money he recentlyspent.The race between the honest chain and an attacker chain can be characterized as a Binomial RandomWalk.
The success event is the honest chain being extended by one block, increasing its lead by +1,and the failure event is the attacker's chain being extended by one block, reducing the gap by -1.The probability of an attacker catching up from a given deficit is analogous to a Gambler's Ruinproblem.
Suppose a gambler with unlimited credit starts at a deficit and plays potentially an infinitenumber of trials to try to reach breakeven.
We can calculate the probability he ever reachesbreakeven, or that an attacker ever catches up with the honest chain, as follows [8]:p = probability an honest node finds the next blockq = probability the attacker finds the next blockqz = probability the attacker will ever catch up from z blocks behind98Given our assumption that p > q, the probability drops exponentially as the number of blocks theattacker has to catch up with increases.
With the odds against him, if he doesn't make a lucky lungeforward early on, his chances become vanishingly small as he falls further behind.We now consider how long the recipient of a new transaction needs to wait before being sufficientlycertain the sender can't change the transaction.
We assume the sender is an attacker who wants tomake the recipient believe he paid him for a while, then switch it to pay back to himself after sometime has passed.
The receiver will be alerted when that happens, but the sender hopes it will be toolate.The receiver generates a new key pair and gives the public key to the sender shortly before signing.This prevents the sender from preparing a chain of blocks ahead of time by working on itcontinuously until he is lucky enough to get far enough ahead, then executing the transaction at thatmoment.
Once the transaction is sent, the dishonest sender starts working in secret on a parallel chaincontaining an alternate version of his transaction.The recipient waits until the transaction has been added to a block and z blocks have been linked afterit.
He doesn't know the exact amount of progress the attacker has made, but assuming the honestblocks took the average expected time per block, the attacker's potential progress will be a Poissondistribution with expected value:To get the probability the attacker could still catch up now, we multiply the Poisson density for eachamount of progress he could have made by the probability he could catch up from that point:Rearranging to avoid summing the infinite tail of the distribution...Converting to C code...#include <math.h>double AttackerSuccessProbability(double q, int z){double p = 1.0 - q;double lambda = z * (q / p);double sum = 1.0;int i, k;99for (k = 0; k <= z; k++){double poisson = exp(-lambda);for (i = 1; i <= k; i++)poisson *= lambda / i;sum -= poisson * (1 - pow(q / p, z - k));}return sum;}Running some results, we can see the probability drop off exponentially with z.q=0.1z=0 P=1.0000000z=1 P=0.2045873z=2 P=0.0509779z=3 P=0.0131722z=4 P=0.0034552z=5 P=0.0009137z=6 P=0.0002428z=7 P=0.0000647z=8 P=0.0000173z=9 P=0.0000046z=10 P=0.0000012q=0.3z=0 P=1.0000000z=5 P=0.1773523z=10 P=0.0416605z=15 P=0.0101008z=20 P=0.0024804z=25 P=0.0006132z=30 P=0.0001522z=35 P=0.0000379z=40 P=0.0000095z=45 P=0.0000024z=50 P=0.0000006Solving for P less than 0.1%...P < 0.001q=0.10 z=5q=0.15 z=8q=0.20 z=11q=0.25 z= 15q=0.30 z=24q=0.35 z=41q=0.40 z= 89q=0.45 z=34012.ConclusionWe have proposed a system for electronic transactions without relying on trust.
We started with theusual framework of coins made from digital signatures, which provides strong control of ownership,but is incomplete without a way to prevent double-spending.
To solve this, we proposed a peer-topeer network using proof-of-work to record a public history of transactions that quickly becomescomputationally impractical for an attacker to change if honest nodes control a majority of CPUpower.
The network is robust in its unstructured simplicity.
Nodes work all at once with littlecoordination.
They do not need to be identified, since messages are not routed to any particular placeand only need to be delivered on a best effort basis.
Nodes can leave and rejoin the network at will,accepting the proof-of-work chain as proof of what happened while they were gone.
They vote withtheir CPU power, expressing their acceptance of valid blocks by working on extending them and100rejecting invalid blocks by refusing to work on them.
Any needed rules and incentives can beenforced with this consensus mechanism.References[1] W.
Dai, "b-money," http://www.weidai.com/bmoney.txt, 1998.[2] H.
Massias, X.S.
Avila, and J.-J.
Quisquater, "Design of a secure timestamping service with minimaltrust requirements," In 20th Symposium on Information Theory in the Benelux, May 1999.[3] S.
Haber, W.S.
Stornetta, "How to time-stamp a digital document," In Journal of cryptology, vol 3, no2, pages 99-111, 1991.[4] D.
Bayer, S.
Haber, W.S.
Stornetta, "Improving the efficiency and reliability of digital time-stamping,"In Sequences II: Methods in Communication, Security and Computer Science, pages 329-334, 1993.[5] S.
Haber, W.S.
Stornetta, "Secure names for bit-strings," In Proceedings of the 4th ACM Conferenceon Computer and Communications Security, pages 28-35, April 1997.[6] A.
Back, "Hashcash - a denial of service counter-measure,"http://www.hashcash.org/papers/hashcash.pdf, 2002.[7] R.C.
Merkle, "Protocols for public key cryptosystems," In Proc.
1980 Symposium on Security andPrivacy, IEEE Computer Society, pages 122-133, April 1980.[8] W.
Feller, "An introduction to probability theory and its applications," 1957.2.The History of MoneyWhat is money? By definition, it's something of value.
But over the last 10,000 years, thematerial form that money has taken has changed considerably—from cattle and cowrie shellsto today's electronic currency.
Here, get an overview of the history of money.101Today we value gold Kruggerands and paper Franklins, but cattle and cowrie shells have also served ascurrency.
EnlargePhoto credit: © Steve Sucsy (coin), Skip O'Donnell (bills), narvikk (cow), Steve Goodwin (shells)/iStockEditor's Note: The dates below mark the approximate start of use.IN THE BEGINNING: BARTERBarter is the exchange of resources or services for mutual advantage, and the practice likely datesback tens of thousands of years, perhaps even to the dawn of modern humans.
Some would evenargue that it's not purely a human activity; plants and animals have been bartering—in symbioticrelationships—for millions of years.
In any case, barter among humans certainly pre-dates the use ofmoney.
Today individuals, organizations, and governments still use, and often prefer, barter as a formof exchange of goods and services.9000 - 6000 B.C.: CATTLECattle, which throughout history and across the globe have included not only cows but also sheep,camels, and other livestock, are the first and oldest form of money.
With the advent of agriculture alsocame the use of grain and other vegetable or plant products as a standard form of barter in manycultures.1200 B.C.: COWRIE SHELLS102The first use of cowries, the shells of a mollusc that was widely available in the shallow waters of thePacific and Indian Oceans, was in China.
Historically, many societies have used cowries as money,and even as recently as the middle of this century, cowries have been used in some parts of Africa.The cowrie is the most widely and longest used currency in history.1000 B.C.: FIRST METAL MONEY AND COINSBronze and Copper cowrie imitations were manufactured by China at the end of the Stone Age andcould be considered some of the earliest forms of metal coins.
Metal tool money, such as knife andspade monies, was also first used in China.
These early metal monies developed into primitiveversions of round coins.
Chinese coins were made out of base metals, often containing holes so theycould be put together like a chain.500 B.C.: MODERN COINAGEOutside of China, the first coins developed out of lumps of silver.
They soon took the familar roundform of today, and were stamped with various gods and emperors to mark their authenticity.
Theseearly coins first appeared in Lydia, which is part of present-day Turkey, but the techniques werequickly copied and further refined by the Greek, Persian, Macedonian, and later the Roman empires.Unlike Chinese coins which depended on base metals, these new coins were made from preciousmetals such as silver, bronze, and gold, which had more inherent value.118 B.C.: LEATHER MONEYLeather money was used in China in the form of one-foot-square pieces of white deerskin with colorfulborders.
This could be considered the first documented type of banknote.A.D.
800 - 900: THE NOSEThe phrase "To pay through the nose" comes from Danes in Ireland, who slit the noses of those whowere remiss in paying the Danish poll tax.806: PAPER CURRENCYThe first known paper banknotes appeared in China.
In all, China experienced over 500 years of earlypaper money, spanning from the ninth through the fifteenth century.
Over this period, paper notesgrew in production to the point that their value rapidly depreciated and inflation soared.
Thenbeginning in 1455, the use of paper money in China disappeared for several hundred years.
This wasstill many years before paper currency would reappear in Europe, and three centuries before it wasconsidered common.1500: POTLACH"Potlach" comes from a Chinook Indian custom that existed in many North American Indian cultures.
Itis a ceremony where not only were gifts exchanged, but dances, feasts, and other public rituals wereperformed.
In some instances potlach was a form of initiation into secret tribal societies.
Because theexchange of gifts was so important in establishing a leader's social rank, potlach often spiralled out ofcontrol as the gifts became progressively more lavish and tribes put on larger and grander feasts andcelebrations in an attempt to out-do each other.1031535: WAMPUMThe earliest known use of wampum, which are strings of beads made from clam shells, was by NorthAmerican Indians in 1535.
Most likely, this monetary medium existed well before this date.
The Indianword "wampum" means white, which was the color of the beads.1816: THE GOLD STANDARDGold was officially made the standard of value in England in 1816.
At this time, guidelines were madeto allow for a non-inflationary production of standard banknotes which represented a certain amountof gold.
Banknotes had been used in England and Europe for several hundred years before this time,but their worth had never been tied directly to gold.
In the United States, the Gold Standard Act wasofficially enacted in 1900, which helped lead to the establishment of a central bank.1930: END OF THE GOLD STANDARDThe massive Depression of the 1930s, felt worldwide, marked the beginning of the end of the goldstandard.
In the United States, the gold standard was revised and the price of gold was devalued.This was the first step in ending the relationship altogether.
The British and international goldstandards soon ended as well, and the complexities of international monetary regulation began.THE PRESENT:Today, currency continues to change and develop, as evidenced by the new $100 U.S.
Ben Franklinbill.THE FUTURE: ELECTRONIC MONEYIn our digital age, economic transactions regularly take place electronically, without the exchange ofany physical currency.
Digital cash in the form of bits and bytes will most likely continue to be thecurrency of the future.This feature originally appeared on the site for the NOVA program Secrets of Making Money.104About the authorMarcus de Maria is an investor and trainerSince starting in massive debt and turning it around thanks to personal development, hismission is to help as many people do the same.Marcus in his TV trading and investing series on Sky TVHe is the Founder of Your Crypto Club, where he teaches the general public how to profitfrom:1.
Cryptocurrencies2.
ICOs3.
Blockchain technologyFor more information visit www.YourCryptoClub.comor email Marcus@investment-mastery.com
RIPE Series in Global Political EconomyBITCOIN AND BEYONDCRYPTOCURRENCIES, BLOCKCHAINS, ANDGLOBAL GOVERNANCEEdited byMalcolm Campbell-VerduynBitcoin and BeyondSince the launch of Bitcoin in 2009, several hundred different ‘cryptocurrencies’have been developed and become accepted for a wide variety of transactions inleading online commercial marketplaces and the ‘sharing economy’, as well asby more traditional retailers, manufacturers, and even by charities and politicalparties.	 Bitcoin and its competitors have also garnered attention for their wildly fluctuating values as well as implication in international money laundering, Ponzischemes and online trade in illicit goods and services across borders.
These andother controversies surrounding cryptocurrencies have induced varying governance responses by central banks, government ministries, international organizations, and industry regulators worldwide.
Besides formal attempts to ban Bitcoin,there have been multifaceted efforts to incorporate elements of blockchains, thepeer-to-peer technology underlying cryptocurrencies, in the wider exchange,recording, and broadcasting of digital transactions.
Blockchains are being mobilized to support and extend an array of governance activities.
The novelty andbreadth of growing blockchain-based activities have fuelled both utopian promises and dystopian fears regarding applications of the emergent technology toBitcoin and beyond.This volume brings scholars of anthropology, economics, science and technology studies, and sociology together with global political economy (GPE)scholars in assessing the actual implications posed by Bitcoin and blockchainsfor contemporary global governance.
Its interdisciplinary contributions provideacademics, policymakers, industry practitioners, and the general public withmore nuanced understandings of technological change in the changing characterof governance within and across the borders of nation-states.Malcolm Campbell-Verduyn is an SSHRC Postdoctoral Fellow at the BalsillieSchool of International Affairs, Canada.RIPE Series in Global Political EconomySeries Editors:James Brassett (University of Warwick, UK),Eleni Tsingou (Copenhagen Business School, Denmark)andSusanne Soederberg (Queen’s University, Canada)The RIPE Series published by Routledge is an essential forum for cutting-edgescholarship in international political economy.
The series brings together newand established scholars working in critical, cultural, and constructivist politicaleconomy.
Books in the RIPE Series typically combine an innovative contribution to theoretical debates with rigorous empirical analysis.The RIPE Series seeks to cultivate:•	 field-defining theoretical advances in international political economy•	 novel treatments of key issue areas, both historical and contemporary, suchas global finance, trade, and production•	 analyses that explore the political economic dimensions of relatively neglected topics, such as the environment, gender relations, and migration•	 accessible work that will inspire advanced undergraduates and graduate students in international political economy.The RIPE Series in Global Political Economy aims to address the needs of students and teachers.For a full list of titles in this series, please visit www.routledge.com/RIPESeries-in-Global-Political-Economy/book-series/RIPEBeyond Defeat and AusterityDisrupting (the Critical Political Economy of) Neoliberal EuropeDavid Bailey, Monica Clua-Losada, Nikolai Huke and Olatz Ribera-AlmandozCivil Society and Financial RegulationConsumer Finance Protection and Taxation after the Financial CrisisLisa KastnerBitcoin and BeyondCryptocurrencies, Blockchains, and Global GovernanceEdited by Malcolm Campbell-VerduynBitcoin and BeyondCryptocurrencies, Blockchains, and GlobalGovernanceEdited by Malcolm Campbell-VerduynFirst published 2018by Routledge2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RNand by Routledge711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business© 2018 selection and editorial matter, Malcolm Campbell-Verduyn;individual chapters, the contributorsThe right of Malcolm Campbell-Verduyn to be identified as the author ofthe editorial matter, and of the authors for their individual chapters, hasbeen asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright,Designs and Patents Act 1988.The Open Access version of this book, available at www.taylorfrancis.com,has been made available under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-No Derivatives 4.0 license.Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks orregistered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanationwithout intent to infringe.British Library Cataloguing in Publication DataA catalogue record for this book is available from the British LibraryLibrary of Congress Cataloging in Publication DataA catalog record for this book has been requestedISBN: 978-0-415-79214-1 (hbk)ISBN: 978-1-315-21190-9 (ebk)Typeset in Times New Romanby Wearset Ltd, Boldon, Tyne and WearContents	 List of figures viiList of tables viiiNotes on contributors ixAcknowledgements xiii1 Introduction: what are blockchains and how are they relevantto governance in the contemporary global political economy? 1M alcolm C ampbell - V erd u yn2 Moneys at the margins: from political experiment tocashless societies 25M orit z H ü tten and M atthias T hiemann3 The internal and external governance of blockchain-basedorganizations: evidence from cryptocurrencies 48Y ing - Y ing H sieh , J ean - P hilippe (JP) V ergne ,and S ha W ang4 The mutual constitution of technology and globalgovernance: Bitcoin, blockchains, and the internationalanti-money-laundering regime 69M alcolm C ampbell - V erd u yn and M arcel G og u en5 Between liberalization and prohibition: prudent enthusiasmand the governance of Bitcoin/blockchain technology 88K ai J ia and F alin Zhang6 Cryptocurrencies and digital payment rails in networkedglobal governance: perspectives on inclusion and innovation 109D aivi R odima - T aylor and W illiam W .
G rimesvi Contents7 Governing what wasn’t meant to be governed: acontroversy-based approach to the study of Bitcoingovernance 133F rancesca M u siani , A lexandre M allard , andC é cile M é adel8 Experiments in algorithmic governance: a history andethnography of “The DAO,” a failed decentralizedautonomous organization 157Q u inn DuP ont9 Conclusion: towards a block age or blockages of globalgovernance? 178M alcolm C ampbell - V erd u ynIndex 198Figures3.1	 Variation of the five cryptocurrencies in our sample along thedecentralization spectrum 584.1 The mutually constitutive relationship between technologiesand international regimes 715.1 Spectrum of Bitcoin/blockchain governance 915.2	 Bitcoin price fluctuations, 2009–17 (US dollars) 949.1 Interrelationships between governance by, with, and ofblockchains 186Tables2.1 Evolution of the Bitcoin money game 413.1 List of variables 623.2 Regression results 635.1 Key events and policies in China 102ContributorsMalcolm Campbell-Verduyn is an SSHRC postdoctoral fellow at the BalsillieSchool of International Affairs.
His research combines a general focus on language and ideas in the global political economy, with a specific interest in theroles of private actors, technologies, and technical artefacts in contemporaryglobal governance.
His research has appeared in the journals Business andPolitics, Competition and Change, Global Society, Journal of EuropeanPublic Policy, New Political Economy, and New Political Science.
He is theauthor of Professional Authority after the Global Financial Crisis, publishedin 2017 by Palgrave Macmillan.Quinn DuPont is a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Washington.
Hestudies human and social dimensions of cybersecurity, cryptography, andcode.
He has a PhD in information science (Toronto), and is an ALAaccredited librarian (Western), with a decade of industry experience as asenior information specialist at IBM, an IT consultant, and a usability andexperience designer.
He is currently writing a book on cryptocurrencies andblockchains (Polity).Marcel Goguen is a PhD candidate in political science at McMaster University,Hamilton, Canada.
He studied political science at l’Université de Monctonand the University of Ottawa.
His research focuses on the interstice betweeninternational relations theory, political theory, and global finance.
Under thesupervision of Tony Porter, he is participating in research funded by theSocial Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC) on‘Numbers in the changing fabric of global governance’.William W.
Grimes is Associate Dean for Academic Affairs and Professor ofInternational Relations and Political Science at the Frederick S.
PardeeSchool of Global Studies at Boston University.
He is the author of Unmaking the Japanese Miracle: Macroeconomic Politics, 1985–2000 (CornellUniversity Press, 2001) and Currency and Contest in East Asia: The GreatPower Politics of Financial Regionalism (Cornell University Press, 2009).He has published extensively on financial policy and the political economyof East Asia.x ContributorsYing-Ying Hsieh is a PhD candidate at Ivey Business School (Canada).
Havingreceived her education and worked in the technology sector, Ying-Ying isdeeply interested in the overarching theme of innovation.
Her research setsout to explore how technologies enable novel organizational design, which inturn enables new forms of organizing.
Specifically, she focuses on coordination and governance in the cryptocurrency and fintech industries.
Ultimately,she aspires to theory-building for mechanisms by which organizations inthese sectors create and capture value to achieve superior performance.Moritz Hütten is a graduate student of financial and economic sociology atGoethe University Frankfurt.
His research interests include cryptocurrencies,banking regulation in Europe, and financial literacy.
He has been involved inseveral research projects at Goethe University Frankfurt and Darmstadt Business School, as well as the research centre Sustainable Architecture forFinance in Europe (SAFE).Kai Jia is an assistant professor in the School of Political Science and PublicAdministration, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,Chengdu, China.
Kai Jia completed his doctorate at the School of PublicPolicy and Management in Tsinghua University, Beijing.
He has been a Fulbright Scholar, a visiting scholar at the University of California at Davis.
Hehas extensive research experience in internet and data governance.
Hisresearch topics include the internet platform economy and its regulations,individual production models and value distribution studies, the Bitcoin openresource community and its governance, sovereign data and privacy.
He hasseveral publications in the FTChinese and 21st Century Business Herald.Alexandre Mallard is Director of the Centre de Sociologie de l’Innovation atMINES ParisTech, PSL Research University.
Originally trained as a sociologist of science and technology, he now works in the field of economic sociology.
He has conducted research on sales activity, on very small businesses,and on the rise of network interactions in the corporate environment.
Hiscurrent research projects investigate the social inscription of innovation, atthe crossroads between economic sociology and political science.Cécile Méadel is a sociologist, professor at the Department of Communication(Institut français de Presse-IFP) of Pantheon Assas University in Paris, andassociate researcher at the Center for the Sociology of Innovation.
Her workfocuses on the uses and users of communication technologies, investigatingthe mutual adjustment between a means of communication, the professionalsspecialized in it, its resources, and its users.
Her most recent work is on internet regulation of e-communities and on industrial making of audiences(through audience measurement tools or devices for internet users’contributions).Francesca Musiani (PhD, MINES ParisTech, 2012) is an associate researchprofessor (chargée de recherche), French National Centre for ScientificContributors xiResearch (CNRS), Institute for Communication Sciences (ISCC-CNRS/ParisSorbonne/UPMC), associate researcher at the Centre for the Sociology ofInnovation of MINES ParisTech-PSL, and academic editor for the InternetPolicy Review.
Her research explores internet governance ‘by infrastructure’,and draws upon an interdisciplinary training in information and communication sciences, science and technology studies, and international law.
Francesca is the author of Internet et vie privée [Internet and Privacy] (UpprEditions, 2016) and Nains sans géants.
Architecture décentralisée et servicesInternet [Dwarfs Without Giants.
Decentralized Architecture and InternetServices] (Presses des Mines, 2013 [2015], Prix Informatique et Libertés2013 of the French Privacy and Data Protection Commission, CNIL).Daivi Rodima-Taylor is a lecturer and research associate at the Frederick S.Pardee School of Global Studies of Boston University.
She is a social anthropologist and Africanist, with a doctorate from Brandeis University.
Herresearch focuses on fiduciary culture and financial inclusion, diaspora andmigration, informal economies, land and natural resource tenure, and innovation and entrepreneurship.
Dr Rodima-Taylor has taught sustainable development and anthropology, and contributed to international development work infinancial inclusion, participatory planning, and community governance.
Shehas conducted longitudinal ethnographic research in Africa and published inacademic and policy-oriented journals.Matthias Thiemann is an assistant professor of European public policy at Sciences Po, Paris.
His research investigates the patterns of interaction of publicand private actors in the financial system post-crisis in terms of the development as well as the enforcement of regulation or the intervention of stateactors directly in financial markets.
His work has appeared in the journalsAmerican Journal of Sociology, Review of International Political Economy,Business and Politics, and Competition and Change, among others.Jean-Philippe (JP) Vergne is an associate professor at Ivey Business School(Canada) who examines how socially contested and/or illegal organizationsaffect the birth, death, and renewal of industries operating at the vanguard ofcapitalism.
JP is the founding coordinator of the Crypto Capitalism Centerand co-director of the Scotiabank Digital Banking Lab, where he coordinatesa research programme on fintech.
In 2013, JP co-authored the book ThePirate Organization: Lessons from the Fringes of Capitalism (Harvard Publishing), and in 2017 the graphic novel Déjà Vu, whose chapters can be foundrecorded in the bitcoin blockchain.Sha Wang is a PhD candidate in economics at Western University (Canada).Her research area focuses on the new trends in financial markets and theirimpact on asset returns.
She has co-authored with Professor JP Vergne ondrivers of cryptocurrency returns.
Her PhD thesis studies the impact of speculative activities on major currencies’ exchange rate fluctuations.
She has benefited from her industry experience in the currency hedging arm of anxii Contributorsinvestment institution to incorporate additional insight into her theoreticalframework on currency values.Falin Zhang earned his PhD in International Relations from McMaster University (Hamilton, Canada) in 2015 and is now a postdoctoral research fellow atthe School of International Studies, Peking University (Beijing, China).
Hisprincipal research interests lie in international relations, international politicaleconomy, global financial governance, foreign policy analysis, and Chinesepolitics.
His recent research focuses on China’s foreign policy in global financial governance and recent works include journal articles published, respectively, in the Journal of Contemporary China (‘Holism Failure: China’sInconsistent Stances and Consistent Interests in Global Financial Governance’, 2016) and the Journal of International Relations and Development(‘The Chinese Developmental State: Standard Accounts and New Characteristics’, 2017), a book chapter, ‘Determinants and Fluctuations of China’sExchange Rate Policy’, in The Political Economy of Chinese Finance (editedby J.
Jay Choi et al., Emerald, 2016), and a translated Chinese textbook,Global Political Economy (Robert O’Brien and Marc Williams, 2016).AcknowledgementsThe support of John Ravenhill and the Balsillie School of International Affairsas well as the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada(grant no.
611-2016-0318) is gratefully acknowledged for having enabled fruitful discussions of this research in Waterloo, Canada at the end of February 2017.Sincere thanks are also due to Eleni Tsingou and Eric Helleiner for providingcontinuous support from the inception to the final production of this volume.1 IntroductionWhat are blockchains and how arethey relevant to governance in theglobal political economy?Malcolm Campbell-VerduynImagine having almost instantaneous access to a permanent record of all digitaltransactions undertaken across the world.
Without revealing precisely who andwhat is involved in these transactions, this digital database grants you nearlyreal-time overviews of peer-to-peer exchange within and across national borders.Such unprecedented capacity to monitor direct Internet-based interactionbetween quasi-anonymous individuals who undertake, verify, and publishrecords of their digital transactions is at the core of promises and fears surrounding blockchains.
This volume explores governance implications for the actorsand processes involved in ordering, managing, and organising an increasinglydigital global political economy arising from growing applications of this set ofemergent technologies to Bitcoin and beyond.At their essence, blockchains are digital sequences of numbers coded intocomputer software that permit the secure exchange, recording, and broadcastingof transactions between individual users operating anywhere in the world withInternet access.
Like most technological changes, the development of blockchains drew on and combined several existing technologies.
Blockchains incorporate digital encryption technologies that mask, to varying degrees, the specificcontent exchanged as well as the identities of individual users.
Algorithms, precoded series of step-by-step instructions, are also mobilised in solving complexmathematical equations and arriving at a consensus on the validity of transactions within networks of users.
Time-stamping technologies then periodicallybundle verified transactions into datasets, or ‘blocks’.
Linked together sequentially, these ‘blocks’ form ‘chains’ that make up larger ‘blockchain’ databases oftransactions that broadcast a permanent record of transactions whilst maintainingthe anonymity of users and specific content exchanged.
Blockchains are intendedto be maintained by all users in manners meant to be immutable, unless usersarrive at a clear consensus to undertake changes.Ledgers of user-verified transactions were envisioned by the science fictionwriter H.G.
Wells (2005) in the 1930s and advocated by ‘cypherpunk’ computerhackers seeking to ensure digital privacy as the Internet began evolving later inthe twentieth century (Jeong, 2013).
The technical blueprint for developingblockchain technology was originally proposed in a white paper published byone Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008.
Efforts to identify this individual or group of2 M.
Campbell-Verduynindividuals have remained unsuccessful, adding a substantial aura of mystery tothis information communication technology (ICT).1 The technical design forblockchains initially circulated on the cryptography mailing list was quicklytaken up by an online community of technology enthusiasts, who developedBitcoin as the first time-stamped ledger of user-verified transactions in 2009.
Initially intended to enable the transactions of monetary-like ‘coins’ between users,the Bitcoin blockchain was later adapted for the digital exchange, verification,and broadcasting of a range of other information.
As non-proprietary and opensource software, the original Bitcoin ‘protocol’ was replicated in developingother blockchains that exchange not only ‘cryptocurrencies’ (CCs), but also amuch wider range of information on everything from ownership rights and contractual obligations to votes and citizenship.Applications of blockchain technologies began being noticed beyond technologists and technology enthusiasts a half-decade following the publication ofthe 2008 white paper.
Attention to Bitcoin in particular exploded in 2013because of a confluence of events internal and external to esoteric online ‘cryptocommunities’.
Internally, the rise and fall of both the leading ‘exchange’ converting CCs to and from state-backed currencies, Tokyo-based Mt.
Gox, as wellas the infamous online marketplace for illicit goods and services, the Silk Road,received widespread media coverage.
Primarily negative and sensationalistic,this attention alerted citizens, firms, and governments to what appeared as the‘new wild west’ surrounding Bitcoin (Singh, 2015).
At the same time, a host ofexternal events focused more positive attention to the potential benefits of theoriginal application of blockchain technologies as alternatives to the widespreadgovernment and corporate surveillance revealed in the Edward Snowden leaks;financial instabilities in the eurozone that included the confiscation of deposits inthe ‘bailout’ of Cypriot banks; technical glitches at major banks that left customers unable to access their savings; and confirmation that controversial centralbank quantitative easing programmes would be extended well beyond their original intention as emergency responses to the 2007–08 global financial crisis.Whether for philosophical, speculative, or security reasons, wider public interestin the promises and perils of Bitcoin occurred in a period of unprecedented volatility in the exchange values of the original CC, which rose nearly tenfold fromjust over US$10, only to fall by nearly half and eventually end 2013 at aroundUS$750.In the wake of this pivotal year, Bitcoin and blockchain technologies becameincreasingly integrated into the very global economic system that their earliestdevelopers had explicitly sought to provide alternatives to.
Bitcoin became progressively accepted for a wide variety of transactions in leading online commercialmarketplaces, such as eBay, in the ‘sharing economy’ of AirBnB and Uber, as wellas by more traditional retailers, manufacturers, and even by some political parties.Beyond merely accepting Bitcoin for transactions, some multinational firms begandeveloping their own CCs and integrating blockchains into their operations.
Theworld’s largest retailer, Wal-Mart, trialled the technology for enhancing qualitycontrol over its global food supply chain.
Several investment banks and stockIntroduction 3market operators also began integrating blockchains in efforts to streamline theirback-office operations.
Even some governments began developing blockchainbased land and health registries as well as benefits payments systems.
A widervariety of applications2 beyond the esoteric online communities and illicit marketplaces in which the technology had originally been applied heralded the growingintegration of blockchains into key segments of the global political economy.While surveys nearly continually hint at ever-greater roles and applications ofblockchains (e.g.
World Economic Forum, 2015: 24), even traditionally enthusiastic consultants have begun to consider whether ‘peak hype’ has been reachedin the excitement this technology has generated (Gartner, 2016).
Leading media,such as The Economist (2015), stress the ‘extraordinary potential’ of the blockchain ‘as a piece of innovation on a par with the introduction of limited liabilityfor corporations, or private property rights, or the internet itself’.
Scholars havecharacterised blockchains as ‘the most important innovation in fundamentalarchitecture since the tubes of the internet were first developed’ (LawrenceLessig, cited in Eyers, 2015).
The first book dedicated to blockchains comparesthe technology to the Magna Carta and the Rosetta Stone, providing ‘the potential for reconfiguring all human activity’ (Swan, 2015: viii).Further context and nuance is clearly necessary for evaluating the widersocio-economic implications of blockchains in a global political economy that ismore interconnected than ever before as a result of the increasing spread andapplication of these and other Internet-based technologies.
In specificallyaddressing the implications posed by blockchains for governance in the contemporary global political economy, this book provides wider insights into thechanging character and role of emergent technologies in organising, ordering,and managing the increasingly instantaneous and multifaceted relationshipsbetween actors and processes within and beyond the borders of nation-states.Implications for, and insights into, contemporary globalgovernanceHow does examining a relatively esoteric set of emergent technologies yielduseful insights into the character of contemporary global governance? Journalists and technology enthusiasts regularly hint at how applications of blockchainshave been transforming key facets of twenty-first-century global governance.Gillian Tett (2014) at the Financial Times, for instance, has emphasised howblockchains shift trust from traditional centralised institutions towards decentralised users interacting directly through digital cryptography and computer code.Technologists, meanwhile, celebrate how blockchains foster nearly instantaneous exchange to occur amongst individuals that bypasses a range of intermediaries and centralised ‘trust actors’, governments in particular (e.g.
Cox, 2013;Brito et al., 2015; Koenig, 2015).
Rather one-sided praise of such curtailment ofcentralised authority, along with journalistic assessments hampered by formatsmore conducive to sensationalistic claims than nuanced analysis, provide some,albeit limited, insight into the changing character of twenty-first-century global4 M.
Campbell-Verduyngovernance (e.g.
Kaminska, 2015; Soltas, 2013; Rifkind, 2013; Vigna andCasey, 2015; for an exception see Popper, 2015).Scholarly treatments of Bitcoin, CCs, and blockchains began to emerge in2011.
With some exceptions, early studies have remained technical and narrowlyfocused, largely avoiding consideration of the wider implications that blockchainapplications pose for contemporary global governance.3 Legal scholarship detailing the varied manners in which Bitcoin, CCs and blockchains fit within existingformal laws and regulations often loses sight of the wider governance implications presented (Bollen, 2013; Farmer, 2014; Hughes and Middlebrook, 2014;Penrose, 2013; Kiviat, 2015; Pflaum and Hateley, 2013; Ponsford, 2015).
Studiesby computer scientists focused on the technical properties of blockchains arelargely concerned with testing the immutability and pseudo-anonymity of blockchain applications (Arvind et al., 2016; Böhme et al., 2014; Yli-Huumo et al.,2016).
Economists, the most prominent public commentators on CCs and blockchain technologies (Foley, 2015), largely contemplate whether or not CCs canbe considered as currencies or central elements of the so-called ‘Internet ofMoney’ (Wladawsky-Berger, 2014; e.g.
Dwyer, 2015; Lo and Wang, 2014;Selgin, 2015; Weber, 2016).4While pioneering in their analysis of complex technological developments,initial scholarly studies tend to be economistic, legalistic, and technical inmanners that overlook, or merely hint at, wider considerations for global governance in the ‘digital age’ (Der Derian, 2003).
Key questions of governance oftenremain unaddressed in this literature, such as how and where exactly are decisions made and discontent voiced in blockchain-based activities? Do blockchainsovercome the flaws of existing decision-making processes? Do blockchains giverise to new governance problems and pathologies? Is ‘blockchain-based governance’ desirable for all actors in the global political economy?Social scientists, and scholars of global political economy (GPE) in particular,have long addressed questions more generally pertaining to the nexus of technology and global governance, and in regards to ICTs in particular (Singh andRosenau, 2002; see also Ruggie, 1975; Talalay and Farrands, 1997; Porter,2002).
The turn of the millennium technology stock bubble and rise of Internettechnologies were analysed in nuanced debates, such as over the opportunitiesand threats presented for traditional forms of monetary governance posed byelectronic moneys (Cohen, 2001; Helleiner, 1998; Kobrin, 1997).
More widely,GPE studies provide a range of insights on key questions of agency, ethics, legitimacy, and power arising from applications of novel technologies.
For example,scholarship on ‘digital gaps’ draws attention to how technology-enableddecision-making can become dominated by specialists and exclude those lessfamiliar or less able to remain appraised with intricate sets of technologies(Wade, 2002; Youngs, 2007).
New and emergent technologies are regarded notonly as fostering the cooperation and progress stressed in liberal and moretechno-uptopian accounts, but also as giving rise to technocratic forms of governance characterised by the inequalities and power asymmetries emphasised incritical and more techno-dystopian perspectives.Introduction 5However, GPE scholars have yet to extend such insights to the governanceimplications raised by applications of blockchains.
Detailed GPE analysis oftechnological changes in the aftermath of the 2007–08 global financial crisis (e.g.Gabor and Brooks, 2016; Hansen and Porter, 2017; Langley and Leyshon, 2016;Nesvetailova, 2014; Rogers and Clarke, 2016) considers neither the advent ofblockchain technologies nor their primary application with CCs.
Analysis in therelated interdiscipline of International Relations (IR) similarly overlooks blockchains despite a growing focus on interlinkages between governance and technologies (Mayer et al., 2014a, 2014b) and ‘large technical systems’ moregenerally (Mayer and Acuto, 2015), as well as the Internet specifically (Carr,2016; Choucri, 2012; Mueller, 2010).This book provides an initial of many sets of bridges across the gap betweenwider and longstanding GPE consideration of the governance implications presented by technologies and the more specific analysis of blockchains emergingin related academic disciplines.
To understand the wider socio-economicimplications of blockchains and the changing nature of global governance, keyissues at the heart of GPE, including the agency, legitimacy, and power of specific actors and processes underpinning global governance, need to be integratedinto technical, legal, and economic scholarship on Bitcoin and blockchain technologies that is beginning to consider such issues (e.g.
Bjerg, 2016; Böhme etal., 2015; De Filippi and Loveluck, 2016).
This volume brings together scholarsof anthropology, economics, and sociology as well as science and technologystudies (STS) in conversation with GPE scholars.
To ensure overall degree ofcoherence across chapters by interdisciplinary groups of scholars, all contributors were asked to contemplate three core questions:1 What opportunities and challenges do blockchain applications provide forglobal governance?2 Who specifically is (dis)empowered by applications of blockchaintechnologies?3 How are certain actors and processes (dis)empowered by applications ofblockchain technologies?Unlike the technical consensus required to process blockchain transactions, noartificial agreement on a single set of answers to these questions was imposed ingenerating this volume.
Rather, varying and at times divergent insights into howa rapidly evolving set of emergent technologies are impacting key facets of contemporary global governance were promoted in the recognition that a diversityof analyses is necessary for understanding their nuanced implications.
Thecentral findings of this volume previewed in the final section of this chapter aretherefore necessarily provisional.
The following sections more widely situate theanalysis of contributors within existing GPE and social scientific debates onemerging technologies and global governance.6 M.
Campbell-VerduynTechnologies and global governanceA conceptual starting point of debate shared amongst contributions to thisvolume relates to the nature and evolution of technological change.
In their specific assessments of applications of blockchains to Bitcoin and beyond, contributors assess whether this set of technologies can be considered as ‘emergent’.Emergence here refers to how practical applications of novel types of knowledgein the global political economy remain largely, if not wholly, unsettled.
Scienceand technology policy scholars identify emergent technologies, first, by the newdimensions of knowledge or principles they apply in novel manners; second, byrapid growth in funding and research their attempted applications receive; third,by their core community of supporting actors; and fourth, by uncertain yet ambitious projections of the significance that their applications will have on existingsocio-economic systems (Rotolo et al., 2015).
Many applications of emergenttechnologies remain theoretical in nature, at ‘proof of concept’ stages rather thanunderlying existing practices in the global political economy.
Despite what areoften highly publicized allusions to their ‘revolutionary’ nature, the actual potential of the novel set of knowledge remains indeterminate.
In other words, widespread ‘projections of potential applications remain just that – projectedaspirations and hopes’ (Einsiedel, 2009: 3).How and when do emergent technologies become ‘established’ in the relationships between actors and processes that underpin global governance? Thisquestion can productively be explored by examining blockchain applicationsthat, as noted above, have grown exponentially CCs in the second half-decadesince the advent of Bitcoin.
Rotolo et al.
(2015) consider that technologies ceaseto be characterised as emergent once either their practical applications becomeless ambiguous and more widespread in activities beyond their initial niche, oronce their rapid growth in funding and potential applications declines and theybecome abandoned by their supportive community.
In neither scenario, however,are transitions from emerging to established technologies entirely clear-cut.
Totake perhaps the most well-known contemporary example, the Internet spreadfrom initial development and application in security and academic communitiesto underpin vast tracks of activity across the global political economy.
Novelapplications of this technology continue expanding relentlessly, however, withthe ‘Internet of things’, for instance, slated to contribute to a ‘fourth industrialrevolution’ (Schwab, 2016).
The evolution of the Internet thus illustrates theunclear boundary between established and emergent technologies.In enhancing clarity of what emergent technologies are and how they evolve,this volume draws on earlier insights from IR and GPE studies of technology.
Ashared starting point is the ‘Skolnikoff principle’.
In The Elusive Transformation, the scholar of technology and international affairs, Eugene Skolnikoff(1993: 35), stressed how ‘new technologies, whatever their source, often willhave applications far from the original purposes for which they were developed’.The still unknown designer(s) of blockchain technologies likely never contemplated nor foresaw the diverse range of applications with this technology as theirIntroduction 7‘shared genus’ (Russell, 1997: 55).
So-called wider ‘blockchain 2.0’ applications building on and going beyond CCs have challenged seemingly established notions of what this emergent technology fundamentally consists of.Consistent efforts have been made to substitute the term blockchains with ‘distributed ledger technologies’ (DLTs).
However, DLTs subtly yet importantlychange the original decentralised and ‘permissionless’ character of blockchainsby developing closed ledgers that require specified actors to serve as formalgatekeepers in granting permission to select users.
These experiments and thedifferent governance implications they prompt are characterised by much ofthe ambiguous, experimental, and provisional character that GPE and legalscholars have identified as increasingly prevalent in contemporary globalgovernance (e.g.
Best, 2008; Brassett et al., 2012; Broome and Seabrooke, 2008;De Búrca et al., 2014).Wider blockchain ‘2.0’ applications are also indicative of the uncertain anddifficult to predict paths the evolution of emergent technologies take in becoming increasingly established within the activities of existing actors and existingprocesses in the global political economy.
As the Skolnikoff principle suggests,each process of development occurs in unique ways that are often lacking inprecise historical parallel.
Though frequently compared with the Internet, blockchain applications more precisely build on top of existing Internet infrastructures.Consequently, blockchain applications might be more appropriately comparedwith specific Internet-based technologies such as Voice over Internet Protocols(VoIPs), like Skype.
In turn, DLTs can be understood as the reverse of ongoingefforts to develop ‘open source’ operating systems (OS) such as Linux from original ‘closed-source’ Windows and Mac OS.
Yet even such specific comparisons may be thrown into doubt, for instance by ongoing efforts to applyblockchain technologies to newer, more decentralised versions of the Internetitself (Kastelein, 2016).5Beyond considering what emergent technologies are and how their evolutioncan be conceived, this volume engages wider debates on the implications of whatpractical applications of novel types of knowledge actually do.
Technologists,consultants, and other market actors tend to stress the ‘disruption’ that theenhanced competition applications of emergent technologies may provide.
Thiscompetition is often implicitly understood in liberal framings as normativelydesirable for all socio-economic actors and processes in capitalist political economies (e.g.
Schwab, 2016).
Yet, as critical GPE studies have explicitly countered, competition inevitably produces both winners and losers, may not alwaysbe desirable in all areas of social activity, and may actually reinforce longstanding processes and actors (e.g.
Clarke, 2017; Wigger and Buch-Hansen, 2013).This volume therefore shifts beyond the widespread tendency to merelyimplicitly invoke the potential benefits of ‘disruption’ by more explicitly considering the actual implications arising from technological change.
Contributorsdetail both normatively positive as well as negative consequences posed for boththe actors and process underpinning contemporary global governance.
Theseimplications are more widely linked to the interrelated forms of governance by8 M.
Campbell-Verduynemergent technologies, through emergent technologies, and with emergent technologies that scholars of science and technology policy and of GPE are beginning to identify (Campbell-Verduyn et al., 2016; Pelizza and Kuhlmann,forthcoming; see more widely Chwierut, 2016).
The following sub-sectionsillustrate examples of the insights that interdisciplinary studies of blockchainsare beginning to yield into broader GPE debates on the consequences of technological change for global governance, and which contributors to this volumebuild upon.6The normative implications of governance by emergent technologiesIn an initial instance, analysing blockchains and their various applications provides insight into how the specific characteristics of technologies themselveshave profound implications for contemporary global governance.
Constructivistscholars in GPE and other disciplines consider technologies as deeply socialphenomena that are underpinned by specific ideologies and ideas with the powerto constitute the interests and incentives of their users.
These processes canbroadly be conceived as forms of governance by technologies.
Technologieshere are understood as ‘powerful forces acting to reshape that activity and itsmeaning’ (Winner, 1986: 6; see e.g.
Barbrook and Cameron, 1996).
The implicitand often backgrounded ideas and norms underpinning computer code, forexample, give rise to regularised patterns of behaviour (Berry, 2012).
Understanding computer code as a form of law (Lessig, 2006) stresses the manners inwhich specific features of technologies themselves can reframe, redefine, andreconstitute the mundane activities of the social actors and social process underpinning global governance.
The specific arrangements and architectures of technologies, such as the Internet, are regarded as crucial ‘arrangements of power’(DeNardis, 2014: 7), with key implications for ‘what is possible’ (Auld et al.,2010: 21).Governance by emergent technologies is revealed in several existing interdisciplinary studies that have examined blockchain applications.
The incentives foractors to hoard Bitcoins imposed by technical limits on the creation of amaximum 21 million monetary tokens in the original blockchain have beenlinked to a particular monetary philosophy alternatively identified as ‘digitalmetallism’ (Maurer et al., 2013) and ‘neo-metalism’ (Jeong, 2013).
Rather thanassuming blockchains to be overly complex and incomprehensible ‘black boxes’(Rosenberg, 1982: vii), the specific properties of these technologies are increasingly being drawn out and linked to forms of governance by emergent technologies.
One example is how the ‘permissionless’ character of blockchains haspositioned their users as ‘dispersed, atomized, self-interested individuals’ operating in what has been compared with Hobbesian states of nature (Atzori, 2017).Lacking recourse to higher authority, the computer code underlying blockchainshas been regarded as forming a type of ‘techno-Leviathan’ that structures theactivities and incentives of its users in important yet often implicit manners(Scott, 2015).
The monetary-like coins or tokens granted as rewards for verifyingIntroduction 9blockchain transactions have further been considered as forms of ‘gamification’ (DuPont and Maurer, 2015) that extend the principles of Milton Friedman(1970) in incentivising users to maximise self-interest in order to contribute tothe wider benefit of the communities they operate within.
That the originalBitcoin blockchain is explicitly underpinned by liberal and libertarian ideologies has been increasingly recognised by critics and promoters alike as constituting users as particular types of ‘consumer-citizens’ (Swan, 2015; for acritique see Karlstrøm, 2014).Yet what exactly do the principles underlying blockchains entail for specificactors and processes in contemporary global governance? Contributors to thisvolume extend the findings of existing interdisciplinary blockchain studies bynot only drawing out further instances of governance by emergent technologiesbut also by assessing the governance implications posed.
In doing so, theynavigate between the claims of liberal commentators that implicitly considergovernance by emergent technology to be normatively positive and those of critical scholars who more explicitly lament the negative consequences stemmingfrom how blockchain applications enable individualistic and capitalist relationsto be extended into further spheres of social activity (e.g.
Golumbia, 2015).(Dis)empowerment in governance with emerging technologiesIn a second instance, this volume builds on blockchain studies yielding insightsinto longstanding GPE debates on the specific actors and processes that are(dis)empowered through forms of governance with technologies.
In contrast toconstructivist understanding of technology as fundamentally shaping its users,these approaches assume rationalist conceptions of technologies as tools foradvancing predetermined and unchanging actor self-interests.
Emergent technologies here enable some actors to exercise power over others in zero-sum gamesthat inevitably yield winners and losers.
These debates engage traditional GPEconcerns with how a specific technology ‘is (or is not) adopted when it is, andfor whom’ (Underhill, 1997: 141; e.g.
Huo, 2015).
In other words, emergenttechnologies are considered to enhance global governance capacities by helping‘a wide range of state and non-state actors to acquire new interaction capacitiesthereby becoming more effective and influential players on the global stage’(Fritsch, 2014: 120).Who precisely is empowered in governance with emergent technologies suchas blockchains? Existing studies by scholars and formal governance actorssuggest that instrumental uses of blockchains may empower several sets of historically underprivileged actors.
Blockchain applications for remittances havebeen widely praised for enhancing the ‘inclusion’ of migrants, temporary ‘guestworkers’, and the ‘unbanked’ into key processes of market-based governance(Ammous, 2015; Athey, 2015; European Banking Authority, 2014; Her Majesty’s Treasury, 2015).
CCs such as Ripple7 are specifically designed to facilitatecross-border money flows in manners that reduce the fees and pathologiesinvolved with longstanding global remittance processes (Kunz, 2011).
Along10 M.
Campbell-Verduynwith competing CCs such as Stellar,8 these applications of blockchains havebeen less enthusiastically recognised as helping other individuals, such aswhistleblowers, and organisations such as Wikileaks to gain further prominencein global governance by holding powerful actors accountable (Banque de France,2013; Simser, 2015; see more generally Pieterse, 2012).At the same time, existing studies of blockchains also suggest that applications of these technologies may disempower established non-state actors at theheart of global governance.
The roles of financial intermediaries in the creditcard and money transfer industries, for instance, are bypassed in peer-to-peer CCtransactions.
Blockchains also threaten the longstanding governance roles ofinsurers and accountants in interpreting insurance claims and auditing transactions, respectively (von Gunten and Mainelli, 2014; Spoke and Steel, 2015).By automatically verifying and triggering pre-encoded contractual terms,blockchain-based ‘smart contracts’ challenge the interpretations of ambiguouscontractual language by lawyers (DuPont and Maurer, 2015; Swanson, 2014;Campbell, 2016).
Blockchains may thereby contribute to the wider technologicalchallenges faced by traditional professionals whose expert knowledge has longunderpinned global governance whilst empowering new sets of professionalssuch as computer coders and ICT developers (Susskind and Susskind, 2015;Campbell-Verduyn, 2017).
At the organisational level, layered sets of smart contracts may further displace established processes of corporate governance.
Thecrowdfunding campaign for the first decentralised autonomous organisation(DAO), a venture capital fund that was to be managed by layered sets of smartcontracts rather than human executives and board members, raised a sum of CCsequivalent to a record $170 million in 2016.Applications of blockchain technologies thereby appear to be disintermediating the roles of key centralised actors and processes traditionally underpinningglobal governance in manners that may not always be normatively desireable.Enabling transactions that circumvent the banks and other financial institutionscharged with monitoring and supplying states with income information, whilstgenerally being beyond the reach of traditional global tax governance processes,has led one legal scholar to characterise CCs as ‘super tax havens’ (Marian,2013).
Blockchain applications may be indicative of shifting governance authority enabled by emergent technologies in an age in which, as the Internet governance scholar Laura DeNardis (2014: 9–10) puts it, ‘[t]raditionally dominantinstitutions of power – whether nation states, religious institutions, or multinational corporations – have lost some of their historic control’.
In principle,applications of blockchain technologies appear to contribute to the ‘decentralization of political power within societies’ (Skolnikoff, 1993: 240) that GPEscholars have recognised as shifting ‘power and the locus of authority away fromthe state’ (Singh and Rosenau, 2002: 2; see more widely Junne, 1997; Cerny,1994; Auld et al., 2010; Youngs, 2007: 10).
Such loss of centralised governancecapacity may be celebrated in enhancing the competition, for instance, to statemonopolies over national currencies, as CC supporters tend to stress in invokingthe liberatarian arguments of deceased Austrian economist Friedrich Hayek inIntroduction 11The Denationalisation of Money (Hayek, 1976; Paul, 2016).
Yet, whilst praisingthe limits imposed on overtly political forms of state-driven governance, CCsupporters tend to overlook both the normative and practical problems that haveremained unresolved in such applications of blockchain technologies.
Forinstance, the lack of recourse to a centralised entity to rectify a loss or theft ofCCs leaves ‘altcoin’ users without remedy, which business ethicists have recognised as unfair (Dierksmeier and Steele, 2016).Yet instrumental uses of blockchain technologies may actually empower thecentralised actors and processes that have long underpinned global governance.States are not solely at the whims of technological change but, as GPE and otherscholars have long recognised, still the predominant actors in global governanceare often active in developing and applying emergent technologies (Datz, 2008;Mazzucato, 2015; Strange, 1998).
Even small states have ‘partnered’ with blockchain firms, for instance, to provide ‘e-residency’ identity documents for foreigninvestors (Sullivan and Burger, 2017).9 Blockchain-based registries of government data and blockchain-based issuance of public social welfare benefits havebeen trialled by governments in both large and small jurisdictions who haveworked in partnership with blockchain firms to fight corruption and abuse(Aitken, 2016; Chavez-Dreyfuss, 2016, 2017; Plimmer, 2016; Shin, 2016).
Stateactors are furthermore employing this set of emergent technologies as tools fortracking and tracing digital transactions in prosecuting crime (Bohannon, 2016:1145).
The Netherlands, for example, has drawn on blockchains in prosecutingindividuals alleged to have undertaken and facilitated money laundering throughBitcoin and other applications of the emergent technology (Eikelenboom andDobber, 2017).
Rather than necessarily undermining state capacities, therefore,governance with blockchains may be empowering established centralised actorsand processes.In addition to states, centralised multinational firms and quasi-state institutions may also be further empowered by blockchain applications.
The Big Fouraccounting firms, for instance, have repositioned themselves as ‘conduits’ tohelp clients implement blockchain technologies (Allison, 2015).10 Large globalbanks have not disappeared but are rather strengthening the back-office operations of longstanding financial processes in working together to develop commonstandards for uses of blockchain technology in global finance (e.g.
R3, n.d.;Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication, 2017).
Centralbankers, moreover, have contemplated the uses of blockchain-backed digital currencies for eliminating paper money (Haldane, 2015; Spence, 2015).
So-called‘state-sponsored’ CCs (Deloitte, 2015) are being explored by central banks toprovide these historically powerful actors with enhanced ‘real-time’ capacities tomonitor aggregate transactions and extend control over interest rates (Eyers,2016; Shubber, 2016; e.g.
Stafford, 2016).
These trends are indicative of howemergent technologies can both ‘induce firms to cooperate’ (Cutler et al., 1999:8) as well as empower the already powerful by reinforcing status quo powerrelations in global governance.
In examining how the actual uses of blockchainsas tools provide actors with relative power over one another, contributors to this12 M.
Campbell-Verduynvolume draw out specific implications of governance with technology for organising, ordering, and managing a global political economy in which increasinglyrapid and complex interrelationships are occurring between actors beyond andwithin nation-states.Coercion and flexibility in the governance of emerging technologiesIn a third instance, contributors to this volume provide insights into contemporary forms of governance of technologies in building on and extendingrecent analysis of whether and how applications of blockchains should be formally governed at various levels of authority.
At the national level, countriesincluding Bangladesh, Bolivia, and Ecuador have pursued a centralised approachbanning the most prominent application of blockchain technology.
Similarly, thePeople’s Bank of China and State Bank of Vietnam have issued formal laws prohibiting financial services firms and their employees from handling and conducting any transactions in CCs.
Studies by computer scientists, legal scholars, andeconomists (e.g.
Böhme et al., 2015) have all warned that such ‘heavy-handed’(Singh, 2015) approaches fail to prevent the illegitimate uses of blockchainactivities.
Centralised forms of coercion are regarded in existing interdisciplinaryscholarship as merely pushing blockchain-based activities towards less stringentjurisdictions and murkier corners of the Internet whilst also harming their morelegitimate and beneficial applications, such as facilitating migrant remittances(Scott, 2016; see also Commonwealth Working Group, 2015: 15–18).Recognising the digital and globe-spanning nature of blockchain activities,governments and formal regulators in other countries and regions have adoptedless restrictive and decentralised approaches to the governance of this emergingtechnology.
On the one hand, supranational agencies in the European Union haveissued stern yet rather general warnings concerning the risks involved with blockchain experiments in order to informally discourage financial institutions fromdealing in CCs (European Banking Authority, 2014; European Central Bank,2016: 2).
Similarly, in the United States, a commissioner of the CommodityFutures Trading Commission has publicly advocated for federal regulators to‘avoid undue restrictions’ and ‘do no harm’ by relying on the ‘nature of the technology’ and the ‘bottom–up’ decentralised forms of governance (Giancarlo,2016).
On the other hand, formal regulatory agencies in Australia, Singapore, theUnited Kingdom, and elsewhere have developed so-called ‘regulatory sandboxes’in which existing laws are temporarily relaxed to permit controlled and monitoredblockchain experiments within their jurisdictions.
Agreements are also being concluded between countries to permit experimentation in blockchain transactionsacross jursidctions.
In contrast to the centralised and more coercive governance ofblockchains in some nations, these more flexible approaches allow for multipletypes of decentralised rule-making characteristics of the ‘provisional’ and ‘experimentalist’ forms of governance that, as noted above, have been identified inseveral areas of contemporary global governance (Best, 2014; Campbell-Verduynand Porter, 2014; Nance and Cottrell, 2014; Overdevest and Zeitlin, 2014).Introduction 13In analysing the formal governance of applications of blockchain technologies, this volume contributes practical lessons and insights into wider debates onthe promises and perils of centralised or decentralised approaches to global governance.
The latter have become critically important for policy-makers in aperiod in which even states and regions that have long advocated more flexible,decentralised governance approaches are beginning to consider shifting towardsmore centralised, formal governance strategies as applications of blockchainshave grown in size, scope, and prominence.
According to the World EconomicForum head of financial services industries, blockchains are slated to become‘the beating heart’ (Giancarlo Bruno, cited in Vanham, 2016) of what the Institute of International Finance (2015) characterises as an emerging ‘internet offinance’.
Key regulators in the US and elsewhere have begun warning thatapplications of blockchain technologies, and CCs in particular, may threatenglobal financial stability (Jopson, 2016).
These warnings are instigating shiftingperspectives on more active and ‘hands-on’, formal approaches that are becoming increasingly attractive to regulators pressed to act or at least be seen ‘to bedoing something’ (MacKnight, 2016).
Insights into how formal regulatoryefforts have and can address problems and governance ‘gaps’ in blockchainbased activities are provided in several chapters of this volume, whose mainarguments are summarised in the following section.Summary of chaptersThe structure of this volume takes inspiration from its title and, more generally,from the growing international recognition that applications and implications ofblockchain technologies have shifted beyond crypto-communities and ‘beyondBitcoin’ (e.g.
Extance, 2015; Kostakis and Giotitsas, 2014; Hutt, 2016; Rosov,2015; Schatsky and Muraskin, 2015).
The initial chapters of this volume focusprimarily on Bitcoin and its competitors.
The volume progressively movestowards chapters that analyse further blockchain applications whose experimental character is indicative of the continually emergent nature of this set oftechnologies.
There is, however, no clear-cut division between initial chaptersfocusing solely on Bitcoin and latter chapters ignoring the leading CC.
While allchapters consider both the initial and more recent applications of the emergenttechnology, the initial prominence of Bitcoin steadily gives way to other blockchain applications as the volume progresses.The justification for this chapter structure is that, as the previous section ofthis chapter indicated, emergent technologies are often framed by their initial ortheir most prominent applications.
Yet, what exactly Bitcoin is and what initialapplications of blockchain are both remain fundamentally contested.
Contributors to this volume, while all employing the term ‘cryptocurrencies’, stress thatCCs are radically different from traditional state-backed currencies.
Chapter 2tackles debates over the specific monetary nature of Bitcoin and its digital competitors head on.
From an innovative combination of heterodox perspectives,sociologists Moritz Hütten and Matthias Thiemann stress the politically charged14 M.
Campbell-Verduynnature of all attempts to develop money, whether or not these are in digitalformats.
Their analysis reveals surprising governance activities undertaken bycombinations of activists, market actors, and states in ‘money games’ thatinclude both longstanding national currencies and recent applications of blockchain technology.
Examining the frequent formal and informal actions undertaken by state and non-state governance actors alike, Hütten and Thiemann stressthe paradoxical nature of attempts to develop ‘apolitical’ forms of money.Through a detailed periodisation of the politics underpinning the evolution ofBitcoin, their chapter contributes to wider interdisciplinary understanding of thepolitically charged nature of emergent technologies and their evolving forms ofgovernance.Chapter 3 identifies a further plethora of actors involved in blockchain-basedgovernance.
Analysing the specific factors driving the values of leading CCs,management researchers Ying-Ying Hsieh, Jean-Philippe Vergne and economistSha Wang distinguish varied yet interconnected roles of several underacknowledged non-state actors in what they refer to as the ‘internal’ and ‘external’ governance of CCs.
From software coders to traditional and social media,multiple sets of actors are shown to exercise agency in forms of community governance in CCs, which are understood to be ‘global organisations’.
The quantitative analysis of this chapter yields a surprising conclusion: that the morecentralised CCs are, with clearer decision-making structures, the higher theirvalue in global markets.
Despite the attention they receive, decentralised CCswith non-hierarchical governance structures are often valued less and theirunclear governance structures tend to be regarded with more suspicion.
Thecounterintuitive findings of this chapter point to the persistent importance of specific organisational forms of self-governance.Chapter 4 then connects considerations of money and media in the previouschapters by analysing the implications of blockchains for global anti-moneylaundering (AML) governance.
Political economists Malcolm CampbellVerduyn and Marcel Goguen assess alarmist claims by media and regulatoryactors that CCs and other applications of blockchain technologies are implicatedin money laundering and undermine AML efforts.
The perception of this emergent technology as a challenge rather than an opportunity for combating international money laundering is linked in this chapter to the particular distributedand quasi-anonymous features of blockchains.
Campbell-Verduyn and Goguendetail how the specific nature of formal governance responses by actors such asthe Financial Action Task Force have in turn influenced a bifurcation of blockchain applications into activities complying and those not complying with AMLefforts.
In illustrating the mutually constitutive and continuously evolving relationship between blockchains and the international AML regime, this chapterhighlights the often surprising and indeterminate trajectories of technology andits formal global governance.Chapter 5 then compares the responses of governments to blockchains inyielding insights into the benefits and drawbacks of formal governance of emergent technologies more generally.
Political economists Kai Jia and Falin ZhangIntroduction 15distinguish prohibitive from laissez-faire approaches in the respective Russianand the American approaches to the governance of blockchain technologies.
Jiaand Zhang then illustrate the more nuanced ‘middle ground’ approach pursuedin China, the country that has become the centre of CC production (Popper,2016).
This model of ‘prudent enthusiasm’ is shown to provide useful regulatoryopportunities whilst effectively confronting the risks presented by technologicalchange.
Jia and Zhang argue that such governance approaches can be usefullyadopted by all countries, and particularly those in the Global South, where‘blockchain evangelists’ (Scott, 2016) are becoming increasingly active.In Chapter 6, anthropologist Daivi Rodima-Taylor and political economistWilliam Grimes combine the discussions of previous chapters on developmentand money laundering into an original analysis comparing the potential andactual promises of blockchain technologies for overcoming the longstandinginefficiencies associated with global remittances.
This chapter stresses the persistent importance of local cultures and governance practices in facilitating theadoption of previous digital payment transactions, such as M-Pesa in EastAfrica, as well as in preventing more recent efforts to integrate blockchain-basedremittance applications.
Through an assemblage approach, Rodima-Taylor andGrimes emphasise both the challenges and opportunities faced by formal andinformal actors involved in organising and maintaining cross-border financialtransactions.
Their analysis yields valuable insights into how forms of governance can integrate emergent technologies in processes of ‘financial inclusion’and development more generally.Chapter 7 underlines the need to view the governance of Bitcoin and otherapplications of blockchain technologies with scepticism.
Through a science andtechnology studies-inspired approach, sociologists Francesca Musiani, Alexandre Mallard, and Cécile Méadel foreground how the discreet and backgroundedgovernance features of blockchain applications influenced several key momentsof tension and crisis since the emergence of Bitcoin in 2009.
Dissecting threewell-publicised instances of disorder and disorganisation enabled and, to lesserextents, resolved through complex interactions between technical infrastructuresand a variety of actors, Musiani, Mallard, and Méadel stress the grounding ofdigital activities in specific socio-material processes.
Their chapter exposes bothformal and informal governance mechanisms underlying applications of emergent technologies that are often assumed to be devoid of governance.In Chapter 8, information scientist Quinn DuPont echoes the stress of Chapter7 on periods of crisis, yet shifts the empirical focus to consider more recentattempts to apply blockchain technology beyond Bitcoin.
The case of the faileddecentralised autonomous organisation (DAO) highlights the growing governance roles of so-called ‘smart contracts’, and the main blockchain-based platform for building them – Ethereum – in experimentation at the fringes of thisniche sector of the global political economy.
Through an ethnographic approach,DuPont navigates the considerable utopian hype surrounding The DAO’s contribution – what is more widely linked to ill-fated attempts to reduce the role ofhumans in automated forms of governance by technology.
This chapter stresses16 M.
Campbell-Verduynthe persistence of active, human roles and social relationships, both in the development and programming of smart contracts, and controversially in responses tocrises arising from their technical flaws.In Chapter 9, the contributions of the volume are brought together and positioned within wider debates on emergent technologies and the insights theirvarying forms of governance provide into the ordering, organising, and managing of an increasingly digital global political economy.
Common threads aredrawn amongst the empirical and conceptual insights of each chapter.
Connections are specifically made between the actors, processes, and outcomes characterising forms of governance by, with, and of blockchain applications.
As even avolume dedicated to analysing these governance implications and insights isconstrained by limits, an agenda for ongoing research is set out specifyingseveral avenues for continually interrogating Bitcoin, CCs and wider applications of blockchain technologies.
In summarising the findings of this volume andproposing further paths forward, this concluding chapter makes the case for persistent interdisciplinary research on the implications and insights that analysis ofblockchains and emergent technologies more widely provide for governance inan increasingly digital global political economy.AcknowledgementsThe support of the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada(fellowship no.
756-2015-0474) as well as the editors at Routledge and the RIPEGlobal Political Economy Series, especially Eleni Tsingou, is gratefullyacknowledged.Notes1 See De Filippi and Loveluck (2016: 26, ft 11) for a coincise overview of efforts toidentify the real Satoshi Nakamoto.
Most prominently, both a 2014 Newsweek investigation and a 2016 announcement by Australian security expert Craig Steven Wrightthat he was Satoshi Nakomoto were discredited as publicity stunts.2 For a wider sampling, see for instance Kharif (2014); Carney (2013); Shin (2015);Metz (2015); Office of the Inspectorate General (2016).3 For an overview of literature on Bitcoin and blockchains, see http://bit.ly/BitcoinResearch4 Some excellent exceptions do exist, such as Ammous (2015) and Böhme et al.(2015).5 An example of which is the Golem Project at https://golem.network/6 More than three-quarters of which is focused on Bitcoin, as a recent review found(Yli-Huumo et al., 2016).7 See https://ripple.com/trade/ripple-for-market-makers/; a similar project is http://saldo.mx/8 See www.stellar.org/how-it-works/use-cases/9 See https://e-estonia.com/e-residents/about/10 See for instance http://rubixbydeloitte.com/Introduction 17BibliographyAitken, R.
(2016, 5 April).
Bitland’s African blockchain initiative putting land on theledger.
Forbes.Allison, I.
(2015, 18 August).
Deloitte, Libra, Accenture: The work of auditors in the ageof Bitcoin 2.0 technology.
International Business Times.Ammous, S.
(2015).
Economics beyond financial intermediation: Digital currencies’possibilities for growth, poverty alleviation, and international development.
Journal ofPrivate Enterprise, 30(3), 19–50.Arvind, N., Bonneau, J., Felten, E., Miller, A., and Goldfeder, S.
(2016).
Bitcoin andcryptocurrency technologies.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.Athey, S.
(2015, January).
5 ways digital currency will change the world.
World Economic Forum.Atzori, M.
(2017).
Blockchain technology and decentralized governance: Is the state stillnecessary? Journal of Governance and Regulation, 6(1), 45–62.Auld, G., Cashore, B., Balboa, C., Bozzi, L., and Renckens, S.
(2010).
Can technologicalinnovations improve private regulation in the global economy? Business and Politics,12(3), 1–39.Banque de France.
(2013).
The dangers linked to the emergence of virtual currencies: Theexample of bitcoins.
Focus, No.
10–5, December.Barbrook, R., and Cameron, A.
(1996).
The Californian ideology.
Science as Culture,6(1), 44–72.Berry, D.M.
(2012).
The relevance of understanding code to international politicaleconomy.
International Politics, 49(2), 277–96.Best, J.
(2014).
Governing failure: Provisional expertise and the transformation of globaldevelopment finance.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Best, J.
(2008).
Ambiguity, uncertainty, and risk: Rethinking indeterminacy.
InternationalPolitical Sociology, 2(4), 355–74.Bjerg, O.
(2016).
How is Bitcoin money? Theory, Culture and Society, 33(1), 53–72.Bohannon, J.
(2016).
The bitcoin busts.
Science, 351(6278), 1144–6.Böhme, R., Christin, N., Edelman, B., and Moore, T.
(2015).
Bitcoin: Economics, technology, and governance.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(2), 213–38.Böhme, R., Brenner, M., Moore, T., and Smith, M.
(eds) (2014).
Financial cryptographyand data security.
Berlin: Springer.Bollen, R.
(2013).
The legal status of online currencies: Are bitcoins the future? Journalof Banking and Finance Law and Practice, 24(3), 272–93.Brassett, J., Richardson, B., and Smith, W.
(2012).
Private experiments in global governance: Primary commodity roundtables and the politics of deliberation.
InternationalTheory, 4(3), 367–99.Brito, J., Hoegner, S., Friedman, J., Rae, N., and Osborne, P.
(2015).
The law of bitcoin.Bloomington, IN: iUniverse.Broome, A., and Seabrooke, L.
(2008).
The IMF and experimentalist governance in smallWestern states.
Round Table, 97(395), 205–26.Campbell, R.
(2016).
The digital future of the oldest information profession.
In F.
XavierOlleros and M.
Zhegu (eds) Research Handbook on Digital Transformations.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.Campbell-Verduyn, M.
(2017).
Professional authority after the global financial crisis.London: Palgrave Macmillan.18 M.
Campbell-VerduynCampbell-Verduyn, M., Goguen, M., and Porter, T.
(2016).
Big data and algorithmic governance: The case of financial practices.
New Political Economy, 22(2), 219–36.Campbell-Verduyn, M., and Porter, T.
(2014).
Experimentalism in European Union andglobal financial governance: Interactions, contrasts, and implications.
Journal of European Public Policy, 21(3), 408–29.Carney, J.
(2015, 27 February).
J.P.
Morgan goes hunting for disruptors and bitcoinexperts.
Wall Street Journal.Carney, M.
(2013, 16 December).
Bitcoin has a dark side: Its carbon footprint.
Pando.Carr, M.
(2016).
US Power and the internet in international relations: The irony of theinformation age.
London: Palgrave Macmillan.Cerny, P.
(1994).
The dynamics of financial globalization: Technology, market structure,and policy response.
Policy Sciences, 27, 319–42.Chavez-Dreyfuss, G.
(2017, 19 April).
Ukraine launches big blockchain deal with techfirm Bitfury.
Reuters.Chavez-Dreyfuss, G.
(2016, 16 July).
Sweden tests blockchain technology for landregistry.
Reuters.Choucri, N.
(2012).
Cyberpolitics in international relations.
Boston: MIT Press.Chwierut, M.
(2016, 24 March).
Intro: Cryptocurrency governance (of, by, for the users?).Smith + Crown.Clarke, C.
(2017, 24 February).
The digital disruption of finance: Monopoly, power anddata in marketplace lending.
Paper presented to the annual convention of the International Studies Association, Baltimore, MD.Cohen, B.
(2001).
Electronic money: New day or false dawn? Review of InternationalPolitical Economy, 8(2), 197–225.Commonwealth Working Group.
(2015).
Commonwealth Working Group on virtual currencies.Cox, J.
(2013).
Bitcoin and digital currencies: The new world of money and freedom.Baltimore, MD: Laissez Faire Books.Cutler, C., Haufler, V., and Porter, T.
(1999).
Private authority and international affairs.In C.
Cutler, V.
Haufler, and T.
Porter (eds) Private Authority in International Affairs.Albany, NY: SUNY Press.Datz, G.
(2008).
Governments as market players: State innovation in the global economy.Journal of International Affairs, 62(1), 35–49.De Búrca, G., Keohane, R.O., and Sabel, C.
(2014).
Global experimentalist governance.British Journal of Political Science, 44(3), 477–86.De Filippi, P., and Loveluck, B.
(2016).
The invisible politics of Bitcoin: Governancecrisis of a decentralised infrastructure.
Internet Policy Review, 5(3).del Castillo, M.
(2015, August 12).
The ‘Great Bitcoin Exodus’ has totally changed NewYork’s Bitcoin ecosystem.
New York Business Journal.Deloitte.
(2015).
State-sponsored cryptocurrency: Adapting the best of Bitcoin’s innovation to the payments ecosystem.
New York: Author.DeNardis, L.
(2014).
The global war for internet governance.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.Der Derian, J.
(2003).
The question of information technology in international relations.Millennium-Journal of International Studies, 32(3), 441–56.Dierksmeier, C., and Steele, P.
(2016).
Cryptocurrencies and business ethics.
Journal ofBusiness Ethics, pp.
1–14.
DOI: 10.1007/s10551-016-3298-0.DuPont, Q., and Maurer, B.
(2015, 23 June).
Ledgers and law in the blockchain.
King’sReview.Introduction 19Dwyer, G.
(2015).
The economics of Bitcoin and similar private digital currencies.Journal of Financial Stability, 17, 81–91.Eikelenboom, S., and Dobber, J.
(2017, 3 January).
OM voert strijd op tegen witwassenvia bitcoin.
Financieele Dagblad.Einsiedel, E.
(2009).
Making sense of emerging technologies.
In E.
Einsiedel (ed.)Emerging technologies: From hindsight to foresight.
Vancouver: UBC Press.European Banking Authority.
(2014).
Opinion on ‘virtual currencies’.
Op/2014/08,pp.
18–19.European Central Bank.
(2016).
Opinion of the European Central Bank.
Retrieved 23November 2016 from www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/en_con_2016_49_f_sign.pdf.Extance, A.
(2015, 30 September).
The future of cryptocurrencies: Bitcoin and beyond.Nature.Eyers, J.
(2016, 21 November).
Central banks look to the future of money with blockchain technology trial.
Australian Financial Review.Eyers, J.
(2015, 14 December).
Why the blockchain will propel a services revolution.Australian Financial Review.Farmer, P.
(2014).
Speculative tech: The bitcoin legal quagmire and the need for legalinnovation.
Journal of Business and Technology Law, 9.Foley, S.
(2015, 15 February).
Professors stake out territory for bitcoin.
Financial Times.Friedman, M.
(1970, 13 September).
The social responsibility of business is to increaseits profits.
New York Times Magazine.Fritsch, S.
(2014).
Conceptualizing the ambivalent role of technology in internationalrelations: Between systemic change and continuity.
In M.
Mayer, M.
Carpes, andR.
Knoblich (eds) The global politics of science and technology, Vol.
1 (pp.
115–39).Berlin: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.Gabor, D., and Brooks, S.
(2016).
The digital revolution in financial inclusion: International development in the fintech era.
New Political Economy, 22(4), 423–36.Gartner.
(2016, 16 August).
Gartner’s 2016 hype cycle for emerging technologies identifies three key trends that organizations must track to gain competitive advantage.Retrieved from www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3412017Giancarlo, C.
(2016, 12 April).
With blockchain, regulators should first do no harm.
Financial Times.Gimein, M.
(2013, 12 April).
Virtual bitcoin mining is a real-world environmental disaster.
Bloomberg.Golumbia, D.
(2015).
Bitcoin as politics: Distributed right-wing extremism.
In G.
Lovink,N.
Tkacz, and P.
de Vries (eds) MoneyLab reader: An intervention in digital economy(pp.
118–31).
Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures.Haldane, A.
(2015, 18 September).
How low can you go? Speech given at the PortadownChamber of Commerce, Northern Ireland.Hansen, H.K., and Porter, T.
(2017).
What do big data do in global governance? GlobalGovernance: A Review of Multilateralism and International Organizations, 23(1), 31–42.Hayek, F.
(1976).
Denationalisation of money: The argument refined.
Auburn, AL:Ludwig von Mises Institute.Helleiner, E.
(1998).
Electronic money: A challenge to the sovereign state? InternationalAffairs, 51, 387–410.Her Majesty’s Treasury.
(2015, March).
Digital currencies: Response to the call forinformation.
London: Author.Hesse-Biber, S.
(ed.) (2011).
The handbook of emergent technologies in social research.Oxford: Oxford University Press.20 M.
Campbell-VerduynHolley, E.
(2015, 28 October).
Linq launches blockchain platform Linq at Money 2020 inLas Vegas.
Banking Technology.Hughes, S., and Middlebrook, S.
(2014).
Regulating cryptocurrencies in the UnitedStates: Current issues and future directions.
William Mitchell Law Review, 40,813–44.Huo, J.
(2015).
How nations innovate: The political economy of technological innovationin affluent capitalist economies.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.Hutt, R.
(2016, 13 December).
Beyond bitcoin: 4 surprising uses for blockchain.
WorldEconomic Forum.Institute of International Finance.
(2015, 16 November).
Banking on the blockchain:Reengineering the financial architecture.
Washington, DC: Author.Jasanoff, S.
(2004).
The idiom of co-production.
In S.
Jasanoff (ed) States of knowledge:The co-production of science and the social order.
London: Routledge.Jeong, S.
(2013).
The bitcoin protocol as law, and the politics of a stateless currency.pp.
9–14.
Available at SSRN: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2294124Jopson, B.
(2016, 21 June).
Regulators say bitcoin poses ‘financial stability risks’.
Financial Times.Junne, G.
(1997).
The end of the dinosaurs? In C.
Farrands, M.
Talalay, and R.
Tooze(eds) Technology, culture and competitiveness: Change and the world politicaleconomy (pp.
57–71).
London: Routledge.Kaminska, I.
(2015, 4 September).
Disrupting the nation state.
Financial Times.Karlstrøm, H.
(2014).
Do libertarians dream of electric coins? The material embeddedness of Bitcoin.
Distinktion: Scandinavian Journal of Social Theory, 15(1), 23–36.Kastelein, R.
(2016, 12 June).
World Wide Web creator Tim Berners-Lee wants to decentralise the Internet with P2P and blockchain technologies.
BlockchainsNews.Kharif, O.
(2014, 28 March).
Bitcoin 2.0 shows technology evolving beyond use asmoney.
Bloomberg.Kiviat, T.
(2015).
Beyond Bitcoin: Issues in regulating blockchain transactions.
DukeLaw Journal, 65, 569–608.Kobrin, S.
(1997).
Electronic cash and the end of national markets.
Foreign Policy,65–77.Koenig, A.
(2015).
A beginner’s guide to bitcoin and Austrian economics.
Munich:FinanzBuch Verlag.Kostakis, V., and Giotitsas, C.
(2014).
The (A)Political economy of bitcoin.
tripleC:Communication, Capitalism and Critique, 12(2), 431–40.Kunz, R.
(2011).
The political economy of global remittances: Gender, governmentalityand neoliberalism.
New York: Routledge.Langley, P., and Leyshon, A.
(2016).
Platform capitalism: The intermediation and capitalisation of digital economic circulation.
Finance and Society.Lessig, L.
(2006).
Code: Version 2.0.
New York: Basic.Lo, S., and Wang, J.C.
(2014).
Bitcoin as money? Boston Federal Reserve Current PolicyPerspectives, No.
14–4.Lucas, L.
(2016, 5 December).
Supermarkets, pig farmers and cotton traders turn toblockchain.
Financial Times.MacKnight, J.
(2016, 1 April).
Blockchain: Less talk, more action.
The Banker.Marian, O.
(2013).
Are cryptocurrencies super tax havens? Michigan Law Review,112(1), 42–3.Maurer, B., Nelms, T.C., and Swartz, L.
(2013) ‘When perhaps the real problem is moneyitself!’: The practical materiality of Bitcoin.
Social Semiotics, 23(2), 261–77.Introduction 21Mayer, M., and Acuto, M.
(2015).
The global governance of large technical systems.
Millennium, 43(2), 660–83.Mayer, M., Carpes, M., and Knoblich, R.
(eds) (2014a).
The global politics of scienceand technology, Vol.
1: Concepts from international relations and other disciplines.Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.Mayer, M., Carpes, M., and Knoblich, R.
(eds) (2014b).
The global politics of scienceand technology, Vol.
2: Perspectives, cases and methods.
Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.Mazzucato, M.
(2015).
The entrepreneurial state: Debunking public vs.
private sectormyths.
New York: PublicAffairs.McCook, H.
(2014).
An order-of-magnitude estimate of the relative sustainability of thebitcoin network.
Retrieved from www.scribd.com/doc/228253109/The-RelativeSustainability-of-the-Bitcoin-Network-by-Hass-McCookMetz, C.
(2015, December 17).
Tech and banking giants ditch bitcoin for their own blockchains.
Wired.Mueller, M.
(2010).
Networks and states: The global politics of Internet governance.Boston: MIT Press.Nakamoto, S.
(2008).
Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system.
Retrieved 21August 2017 from https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdfNance, M.T., and Cottrell, M.P.
(2014).
A turn toward experimentalism? Rethinkingsecurity and governance in the twenty-first century.
Review of International Studies,40(2), 277–301.Nesvetailova, A.
(2014).
Innovations, fragility and complexity: Understanding the powerof finance.
Government and Opposition, 49(3), 542–68.Office of the Inspectorate General.
(2016).
Blockchain technology: Possibilities for theU.S.
Postal Service.
Retrieved from www.uspsoig.gov/sites/default/files/documentlibrary-files/2016/RARC-WP-16-001.pdfOverdevest, C., and Zeitlin, J.
(2014).
Assembling an experimentalist regime: Transnational governance interactions in the forest sector.
Regulation and Governance, 8(1),22–48.Paul, A.
(2016).
Bitcoin vs.
sovereign money: On the lure and limits of monetary reforms.Behemoth: Journal on Civilisation, 9(2), 8–21.Pelizza, A., and Kuhlmann, S.
(forthcoming, 2018).
Mining governance mechanisms:Innovation policy, practice and theory facing algorithmic decision-making.
In E.G.Carayannis, D.F.
Campbell, and M.P.
Efthymiopoulos (eds) Handbook of cyberdevelopment, cyber-democracy, and cyber-defense.
Berlin: Springer.Penrose, K.
(2013).
Banking on Bitcoin: Applying anti-money laundering and moneytransmitter laws.
North Carolina Banking Institute, 18, 529–51.Pflaum, I., and Hateley, E.
(2013).
Bit of a problem: National and extraterritorial regulation of virtual currency in the age of financial disintermediation.
Georgetown Journalof International Law, 45, 1169–215.Pieterse, J.
(2012).
Leaking superpower: WikiLeaks and the contradictions of democracy.Third World Quarterly, 33(1), 1909–24.Plimmer, G.
(2016, 12 July).
Use of bitcoin tech to pay UK benefits sparks privacy concerns.
Financial Times.Ponsford, M.
(2015).
A comparative analysis of Bitcoin and other decentralised virtualcurrencies: Legal regulation in the People’s Republic of China, Canada, and the UnitedStates.
Hong Kong Journal of Legal Studies, 9, 29–50.Popper, N.
(2016, 29 June).
How China took center stage in Bitcoin’s civil war.
New YorkTimes.22 M.
Campbell-VerduynPopper, N.
(2015).
Digital gold: The untold story of Bitcoin.
London: Penguin.Porter, T.
(2002).
Technology, governance and political conflict in international industries.
New York: RoutledgeR3.
(2017).
About R3.
Retrieved from www.r3cev.com/about/Rifkind, H.
(2013, 30 March).
How Bitcoin could destroy the state (and perhaps make mea bit of money).
Spectator.Rogers, C., and Clarke, C.
(2016).
Mainstreaming social finance: The regulation of thepeer-to-peer lending marketplace in the United Kingdom.
British Journal of Politicsand International Relations, 18(4), 930–45.Rosenberg, N.
(1982).
Inside the black box: Technology and economics.
Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.Rosov, S.
(2015).
Beyond bitcoin.
CFA Institute Magazine, 26(1).Rotolo, D., Hicks, D., and Martin, B.
(2015).
What is an emerging technology? ResearchPolicy, 44(10), 1827–43.Ruggie, J.
(1975).
International responses to technology: Concepts and trends.
International Organization, 29(3), 557–83.Russell, A.
(1997).
Technology as knowledge: Generic technology and change in the globalpolitical economy.
In M.
Talalay, C.
Farrands, and R.
Tooze (eds) Technology, cultureand competitiveness: Change and the world political economy.
London: Routledge.Schatsky, D., and Muraskin, C.
(2015).
Beyond bitcoin: Blockchain is coming to disruptyour industry.
Westlake, TX: Deloitte University Press.Schwab, K.
(2016).
The fourth industrial revolution.
Geneva: World Economic Forum.Scott, B.
(2016).
Blockchain technology for reputation scoring of financial actors.
Ethicsin Finance, Robin Cosgrove Prize Global Edition 2014–2015, pp.
128–39.Scott, B.
(2015, 1 June).
Visions of a techno-Leviathan: The politics of the Bitcoin blockchain.
E-International Relations.Selgin, G.
(2015).
Synthetic commodity money.
Journal of Financial Stability,17, 92–9.Shabab, H.
(2014, 9 October).
Regulating Bitcoin and block chain derivatives.
Writtenstatement to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2508707Shin, L.
(2016, 21 April).
Republic of Georgia to pilot land titling on blockchain witheconomist Hernando De Soto, BitFury.
Forbes.Shin, L.
(2015, 28 October).
MasterCard, Bain Capital Ventures, New York Life invest inBitcoin company digital currency group.
Forbes.Shubber, K.
(2016, 20 January).
Blockchain raises fundamental questions.
FinancialTimes.Simser, J.
(2015).
Bitcoin and modern alchemy: In code we trust.
Journal of FinancialCrime, 22(2), 156–69.Singh, K.
(2015).
New Wild West: Preventing money laundering in the Bitcoin network.Northwestern Journal of Technology and Intellectual Property, 13(1), 38–64.Singh, J.P., and Rosenau, J.
(eds) (2002) Information technologies and global politics:The changing scope of power and governance.
New York: SUNY Press.Skolnikoff, E.
(1993).
The elusive transformation: Science, technology, and the evolutionof international politics.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.Skolnikoff, E.
(1967).
Science, technology, and American foreign policy.
Cambridge,MA: MIT Press.Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication.
(2017, 25 April).Leading global transaction banks kick off blockchain proof of concept with SWIFTIntroduction 23GPI.
Retrieved from www.swift.com/news-events/press-releases/leading-globaltransaction-banks-kick-off-blockchain-proof-of-concept-with-swift-gpiSoltas, E.
(2013, 5 April).
Bitcoin really is an existential threat to the modern liberal state.Bloomberg.Spence, P.
(2015, 25 Feburary).
Bitcoin revolution could be the next internet, says Bankof England.
Telegraph.Spoke, M., and Steele, S.
(2015, 11 July).
How blockchain tech will change auditing forgood.
CoinDesk.Stafford, P.
(2016, 16 June).
Canada experiments with digital dollar on blockchain.
Financial Times.Strange, S.
(1998).
Mad money: When markets outgrow governments.
Manchester: Manchester University Press.Sullivan, C., and Burger, E.
(2017).
E-residency and blockchain.
Computer Law andSecurity Review.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2017.03.016Susskind, R., and Susskind, D.
(2015).
The future of the professions: How technology willtransform the work of human experts.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.Swan, M.
(2015).
Blockchain: Blueprint for a new economy.
Farnham: O’Reilly Media.Swanson, T.
(2014).
Great chain of numbers: A guide to smart contracts, smart propertyand trustless asset management.
Mountain View, CA: Creative Commons.Talalay, M., and Farrands, C.
(1997).
Technology, culture, and competitiveness: Changeand the world political economy.
London: Routledge.Tett, G.
(2014, 19 December).
Breathe deep and pay in Bitcoin.
Financial Times.The Economist.
(2015, 9 May).
Blockchain: The next big thing.Underhill, G.
(1997).
When technology doesn’t mean change: Industrial adjustment andtextile production in France.
In M.
Talalay, C.
Farrands, and R.
Tooze (eds) Technology, culture and competitiveness change and the world political economy.
New York:Routledge.Vanham, P.
(2016, 12 August).
Blockchain will become ‘beating heart’ of the global financial system.
World Economic Forum.Vigna, P., and Casey, M.J.
(2015).
The age of cryptocurrency: How bitcoin anddigital money are challenging the global economic order.
New York: St.
Martin’sPress.von Gunten, C., and Mainelli, M.
(2014).
Chain of a lifetime: How blockchain technology might transform personal insurance.
Long Finance.
www.cryptolibrary.org:8080/handle/21/495Wade, R.
(2002).
Bridging the digital divide: New route to development or new form ofdependency? Global Governance, 443–66.Weber, B.
(2016).
Bitcoin and the legitimacy crisis of money.
Cambridge Journal of Economics, 40(1), 17–41.Wells, H.G.
(2005 [1933]).
The shape of things to come.
London: Penguin.Wigger, A., and Buch-Hansen, H.
(2013).
Competition, the global crisis, and alternativesto neoliberal capitalism: A critical engagement with anarchism.
New Political Science,35(4), 604–26.Wigglesworth, R.
(2015, 22 November).
Hedge funds poach computer scientists fromSilicon Valley.
Financial Times.Winner, L.
(1986).
The whale and the reactor: A search for limits in an age of high technology.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Wladawsky-Berger, I.
(2014, 12 February).
Bitcoin and the Internet of money.
Wall StreetJournal.24 M.
Campbell-VerduynWorld Economic Forum.
(2015).
Deep shift technology tipping points and societalimpact.
Geneva: Author.Wright, A., and De Filippi, P.
(2015).
Decentralized blockchain technology and the rise oflex cryptographia.
SSRN: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2580664Yermacka, D.
(2015).
Is Bitcoin a real currency? An economic appraisal.
In D.L.
KuoChuen (ed.) Handbook of digital currency: Bitcoin, innovation, financial instruments,and big data (pp.
31–43).
London: Academic Press.Yli-Huumo, J., Ko, D., Choi, S., Park, S., and Smolander, K.
(2016).
Where is currentresearch on blockchain technology? A systematic review.
PLOS ONE, 11(10),e0163477.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0163477Youngs, G.
(2007).
Global political economy in the information age: Power andinequality.
New York and London: Routledge.2 Moneys at the marginsFrom political experiment to cashlesssocietiesMoritz Hütten and Matthias ThiemannIntroductionAt the time of writing, the death of Bitcoin has been announced for a total of 121times.1 At the same time, Bitcoin trades at over $1,000/BTC,2 with an estimatedmarket cap of over $16 billion,3 and Bitcoin increasingly is being integrated intothe governance of mainstream monetary systems.
How can we square this circle?How can a seemingly illegitimate cryptocurrency (CC) such as Bitcoin preventits death and become woven into the global fabric of the monetary systems mostcitizens usually encounter? This chapter examines how Bitcoin came to secure aplace as money at the margins of the global monetary system by focusing on thepossibly most controversial question surrounding Bitcoin: what makes Bitcoinmoney? We draw on scholars from heterodox economics and other social sciences to answer this question.
We contrast the orthodox functionalist understanding of money as a medium of exchange, measure of value, and unit of accountwith an alternative approach that views money as a form of game played withina society.
When the dominant money game with its two-tiered banking system atthe center went into crisis in 2008, activists seized that opportunity to positionBitcoin as an alternative money game.
Despite being neither widely accepted bymerchants nor backed by any nation-state, Bitcoin was able to not only survivebut prevail and flourish, slowly weaving itself into the dominant money games.We track the evolution of the money game of Bitcoin and its leading supporters,tracing the cognitive split between its positive and its more illicit aspects thatallowed it to flourish and to maintain itself.
From this processual intertemporalperspective, we trace the cooptation and normalization of a project that was initially strongly anti-statist and anti-establishment, and now is becoming integrated within the dominant money game.
The rest of the chapter proceeds asfollows: first, we examine the topic of theorizing money; second, we discuss theinitial positioning of Bitcoin against the dominant money game; third, wedevelop the original three phases that defined the evolution of Bitcoin as amoney game based on our evaluation of recent journalist, academic, and governmental publications; and fourth, we summarize our findings, concluding how theBitcoin money game changed and shifted since its inception, and how this mightaffect other existing money games.26 M.
Hütten and M.
ThiemannHow can money be?Since its inception, Bitcoin has been the source of scandal and controversy.However, nothing divided minds as much as the claim of whether Bitcoin can orcannot be money.
What may appear as a straightforward question turns out to beanything but clear.
If we want to know how Bitcoin can be money, we must firstgain clarity on what we mean by money.
Just about anywhere in the world today,money is one of the most central institutions organizing society, positing a fundamental puzzle: why would anyone accept inherently useless money for inherentlyuseful goods and services (see Shackle, 1974, in Ganssmann, 2002; Menger, 1892)?Why do people all around the world partake in such an odd endeavor? When oneposes the question like this, the answer seems inherent: each individual participatesbecause he or she knows that everyone else does, too.
But if the use of money isinherently circular, how can we think about the origin of money without alreadypresuming what we seek to explain? How do we ever get started with money?One of the most prominent answers to these questions was that money hasvalue because coins are made from valuable materials.
The idea of groundingthe value of money in a truly valuable commodity has re-emerged countlesstimes throughout history, such as the bullionist movements (Carruthers andBabb, 1996), or the gold standard of the post-war Bretton Woods system.
Thisapproach, however, is difficult to reconcile with the spread and rise of papermoney.
The problem paper money posed to this theoretical approach could bepostponed for some time with reference to the convertibility of paper money intothe truly valuable commodity, but with the end of Bretton Woods in 1971 eventhis tie was cut.
How can paper money be valued without a truly valuable goodbacking it? Paper money can work perfectly fine as long as the people using ittrust in it.
This is what the term “fiat money” (from fide, to trust) suggests.However, when the real issue of money is trust, and not what commodity backsit, we quickly run into tautologies.
If everybody trusts because everybody elsetrusts, who started trusting first? Where do we get started with trust?Heterodox economists and sociologists have offered nuanced answers to thisquestion, providing helpful alternatives to the widespread but limited orthodoxpositions on trust and money.
The economist John Maynard Keynes was convinced that the primary concept of money is the unit of account in which debtsare expressed.
Keynes went on to describe debts as contracts of deferred payments (Keynes, 1971: 3).
Money in this view is closely tied to the concept thatdebts will be discharged in the future.
This understanding is echoed by the sociologist Geoffrey Ingham, who states that the specific feature of money is not somuch facilitating “spot” exchanges, but the “projection of abstract value throughtime” (Ingham, 2002: 128).
In this view, money always bridges from a givenpresent into an uncertain future.
Insofar all money is fiduciary at heart andsociety depends on creating stable arrangements that allow for the developmentof trust that money will still be valued when that future arrives.
In this sense, thehistory of money is a history of trust, not between two individuals, but insteadbetween an individual and a community as a whole (Aglietta, 2002: 32ff.).Moneys at the margins 27Michel Aglietta further differentiates between two types of trust that moneyrequires.
On the one hand, he describes methodical trust as a form of trust thatcomes with routines and traditions as well as past experience of successful interaction, founding a “framework of references and roles within which privateagents mould themselves” (Aglietta, 2002: 34).
On the other hand, he describeshierarchical trust as trust that originates from political authority that imparts it onmoney.
Both forms of trust correspond to a particular institutional underpinningof money.
Methodical trust corresponds to horizontal integration with businessesand individuals trusting that a form of money will be accepted in ongoingexchange.
Vertical trust corresponds to vertical integration with a political structure able to enforce or change the conditions under which a form of money isaccepted.
Most importantly, both forms of trust are not equals: “Hierarchicaltrust is superior to methodical trust because the political entity with authorityover money has the power to change the rules” (Aglietta, 2002: 35).
The importance of hierarchical trust is a notion that other scholars capture when they speakabout the hierarchy of money (Bell, 2001; Mehrling, 2013).
However, sovereignauthority over money has also been a lasting source of discontent, fueling fearsthat the state can use political authority to bend the rules when it wants to coverits own financial needs, thus devaluing everyone’s money in the process(Keynes, 1971).Within such tensions, we must find stable institutional arrangements thatallow us to believe that money will have value in the future.
Yet, finding such anarrangement is not a one-time achievement, but rather a continuous process thatallows us to effectively treat value as invariant even when we know it is not(Mirowski, 1991: 579).
Money must be produced and reproduced in social settings, meaning that we are doing money more than anything else (Ganssmann,2012a: 1).
Consequently, we must not ask what money is, but how we are doingit under different conditions and in different social settings, and most of all overtime.
In his earlier writing, Nigel Dodd (1994) argued that each function ofmoney depends on extended social relations that relate to a geographical or geopolitical area and eventually culminates in what he called a monetary network(p.
XII), that is, the governance arrangement that provides institutional stabilityto a form of money.
In Dodd’s analysis, monetary forms are different from eachother because monetary networks differ.
Such differences include the politicalmeans of validation of forms of money and the institutional mechanisms thathold social relations steady.
Echoing Aglietta’s argument that money requiressystemic or impersonal trust, Dodd described what information participantsrequire to foster the emergence of trust in the monetary network, including astandardized accounting system, information that justifies expectations thatmoney can be reused in the future, information about the spatial and legalproliferation of the network, and information on the behavior and expectationsof others.
Money is thereby a social fact, or rather a social convention based onan articulate governance network where its social and political origins areobscured by the seeming importance of a money object.
But how do thesemonetary networks develop over time? How does the use of money evolve?28 M.
Hütten and M.
ThiemannSocial conventions of money can be understood in parallel to the rules of agame that people play (Ganssmann, 2002: 25).
While rules of games can beknown explicitly as long as they show themselves in the conformity of actionand regularity, they do not need to be known explicitly.
Games and conventionscan be learned through imitation without making all rules explicitly known inthe process.
Explicit and implicit rules nonetheless define obligations and duties,sanctioned and forbidden moves in relation to a particular game.
Rules are iterative.
They require repetition, which creates continuity, but also room for change.Heiner Ganssmann builds on Ludwig Wittgenstein to promote a third solution toour original money paradox, neither committing to ideas of commodity money,nor to circular explanations of utility:[…].
The pawn in chess neither has meaning in the sense of representingsomething, of being a sign of something, nor is it just the piece carved outof wood.
What the pawn is, is determined by the rules of chess.(Wittgenstein, 1984a: 150, in Ganssmann, 2012a: 20)In this view, money is defined by the money game that is being played.
To knowmore about money, we then must ask how a particular game is being played.Money games can widely differ depending on how money is used, accessed, validated, controlled, what goods it can mobilize, and who is excluded.
Narrativesof money are important in building trust in a particular money game (e.g., narratives of commodity-backed money can build trust), but they are not the hiddenground of functioning money.Some general assumptions about money can nonetheless be made.
On theindividual level, money does not come about as an ad hoc insight.
In contemporary capitalist societies, money games are learned over time, mostly froman early age onwards, building routines and cognitive capacities that allowpeople to handle and recognize money.
Beyond the taken-for-granted use ofmoney lies a continuous training process in which the use of money is learned.This helps explain how there can be both general knowledge about money andalso specific monetary practices affected by categories of race, gender, class, andso on (Zelizer, 1997).
On the institutional level, a money game must have anominal unit of account distinct from other commodities, an orderly mintingprocess through which funds become available to agents, and there must be asettlement of balances to maintain monetary constraints (Cartelier, 2013).In addition, money games are always politically charged because decisionsare being made as to whom gets what and how (Carruthers and Babb, 1996).Money games are also strongly connected to political power, and the predominant money games of the present prevailed because they did “fit” with statestructures and political forces constituting their players in particular constellations (Helleiner, 2003: 224).
Bitcoin was built to challenge the predominantmoney game, so we must ask two questions: what is the dominant money game,and how does Bitcoin want to be different?Moneys at the margins 29A slingshot full of (virtual) coinsBitcoin was initially positioned as a clear criticism of the two-level money systemconsisting of central banks and commercial banks (Paul, 2016: 9; Nakamoto,2008).
With such criticism, this cryptocurrency (CC) points to a dominant moneygame that must be understood as a source of discontent.
What can be said aboutthe dominant money game? Even after the emergence of the modern nation-state,public money and private money have existed side by side, and the now dominantmoney game must be understood as a co-evolution of both forms of money(Keynes, 1971).
On the one hand, there is public money (Knapp, 1924), which hasvalue because it is accepted to discharge tax debts.
Such money is based in thecoercive power of the sovereign to tax.
Such money commonly is acceptedbecause and insofar successful states monopolize the coercive power to definewhat counts as abstract value capable of discharging tax debts (Ingham, 2007:269).
On the other hand, there is private bank money, which can be understood asan IOU issued by a bank, which is accepted because there is some form of privatecollateral backing it.
What makes both money games problematic is that theupsides of each also cause their inherent weaknesses.
For public money, the powerof the state to make the rules can be abused in the state’s favor when it decides todefault on debt obligations.
For private money, the power of private money toexpand the money supply for economic growth can create inflation and instability,and, in the worst case, bank runs.
The downsides of both money games were onlycurbed when they united and hybridized into state-backed credit money in 1694with the creation of the Bank of England (Ingham, 2004).Central banks combined the public backing of the public money (the taxationpower of the then king) with the flexibility of private money.
This generatedinstitutional control over the conduct of the sovereign, predominantly over warexpenditures, generating the constitutional monarchy of “the king in parliament”(Ingham, 2004).
Under this arrangement, the stability of public money and theflexibility of private money could coexist, forming the minting process of thismoney game.
What was central to this money game was that the central bankprovided a lender of last resort function for the private banking system and themoney it issued (Ingham, 2006, 2007).
What occurred was an evolutionaryprocess of building vertical trust (Aglietta, 2002) while curbing the dangers ofdespotic excesses undermining this trust.Emerging nation states could not dispense with the need for banking money,yet had to use the power of lender of last resort sparingly.
Further measures tostabilize this money game emerged, creating the growing area of banking regulation (Chick, 2013; Knafo, 2013).
Over the twentieth century, a dominant typeof money game closely tied to territorial states became so thoroughly entrenchedthat it became widely perceived as the “natural” monetary order.
Nevertheless,this type of money game is a contingent historical development (Helleiner, 2003:218).
Built over this period were governance arrangements forming the institutional foundation of our current state-backed credit money that is guarded andstrictly regulated by the state.30 M.
Hütten and M.
ThiemannWhat brought stability to this public–private hybrid money game could onceagain destabilize it, specifically the power of the lender of last resort to suspendmonetary constraints could act as an inflationary scourge (Aglietta and Orléan,1984).
In the financial crisis of 2008, with central banks acting as quasi-sovereigns,fears of despotic abuse of power debasing money and subsequent instability reemerged.
Bitcoin emerged as a criticism of this development.
As a mode of governance, Bitcoin mobilizes two popular approaches to limiting political power:commodity backing and market competition.
Bitcoin was meant to promote bothapproaches, not through a community deliberating on governance standards, butinstead by embedding techno-libertarian beliefs into the coding of the underlyingprotocol.
Bitcoin was built as a supposedly “trustless” and decentralized paymentnetwork.
Users are meant to become independent of a trusted third party processing and watching over transactions, and instead rely on an algorithm facilitating asort of race that rewards a distributed network of computers for remaining honestand including any transaction that is technically valid.Bitcoin provides the institutional preconditions for money exemplified byJean Cartelier: funds are denominated in a unique number of account (BTC/Satoshis), the minting process is integrated with the code distributing funds tothose who maintain the network, and accounts are settled with the network functioning as a decentralized clearing house.
By eliminating dependency on a thirdparty, users are meant to be empowered insofar as they are granted full controlof their money.
It is this central characteristic that has led to Bitcoin beinglauded as a libertarian watershed freeing its users from governmental oppression(Cox, 2013).Bitcoin can thereby be understood as a political experiment promoting aradically different money game.
It has much in common with activist-initiatedlocal currencies in which activists seek to promote reform of the monetarysystem by building and pioneering alternative money games.
The social utopianism that is central to its monetary theory is seeking to change economic realityand society as a whole (Dodd, 2015: 79ff.).
There are thus two money games atplay with Bitcoin: the dominant money game backed by the coercive power ofthe sovereign and extensive institutional underpinning, and the alternative proposed money game that originally lacked coercive power and institutional underpinning beyond what the coding provides.
How could Bitcoin ever establishitself side by side with such dominant existing money games, lacking everythingthat seems fundamental to the making of money?The evolution of the Bitcoin money gameIn this section, we examine the development of the Bitcoin money game overtime to understand how Bitcoin could prevail despite starting off without anyinstitutional underpinning or political backing.
We analyze how Bitcoin acts invivo, so to say, in order to understand this puzzle and draw further conclusionson its implications for the future of the Bitcoin money game and its impact onthe dominant money game.
We evaluate recent journalistic publications onMoneys at the margins 31Bitcoin (e.g., Vigna and Casey, 2015; Popper, 2015), as well as publications bycentral banks and government agencies from the US and Europe (e.g., EuropeanCentral Bank, 2012, 2015; Lo and Wang, 2014; Brainard, 2016) and otherscholars in the emerging field (e.g., Böhme et al., 2015; Weber, 2016) to developa periodization of the development of Bitcoin.
We identify three phases of theBitcoin money game: a phase of initial confrontation (Phase I), a phase ofattempted horizontal integration (Phase II), and finally a phase of likely verticalintegration (Phase III).
While phases overlap and actors of one phase remain relevant throughout other phases, we argue that the development within each phasecan best be characterized by attributing it to the interaction with a particular setof key actors shaping decisive aspects of the development of the Bitcoinmoney game.The confrontation phase (2009–14)Introducing a new money game is anything but easy, as proponents of a newmoney game are confronted with the basic problem of gaining traction in a twosided market, consisting of merchants and customers.
For both sides, a newmoney game becomes interesting because their counterpart joins in and viceversa.
Nonetheless Bitcoin developers did utilize the financial crisis of 2008 topromote an alternative money game supposedly removed from political intervention and “disruptive” state and central bank monetary policy (Nakamoto, 2008).However, most decisive for the early development of Bitcoin was that the proposal provided a “fit” with long-held political beliefs and libertarian visions ofstateless money.
The technology also spoke to “cypherpunk” dreams of bringingcash more thoroughly into the digital age (Popper, 2016: 16).
Entry costs hadbecome low because of technological advancements and design decisions thatrequired no upfront payment beyond committing the time to look into this novelproposal.
Bitcoin quite literally began as one person’s proposal to another, withsomeone or some group using the pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto proposing it,and computer scientist Hal Finney giving the proposal a trial as a monetaryexperiment (Popper, 2016: 25).Attempts to build money based on cryptography are not unprecedented.
Therehave been other money games based on cryptography, such as DigiCash whichfailed to become stable for one reason or another and were unable to build a critical mass of consumers (Tumine, 2002: 75).
While heavily technical, this cryptocommunity was no stranger to explicit political activism.
Efforts to bringencryption to the civil society have created severe political conflicts, includingfrequently re-emerging calls for banning secure encryption for civilians altogether (Ludlow, 2001).
Some of the early advocates of Bitcoin such as RogerVer and Ross Ulbricht were very much driven by strong political ideals and wereintrigued by the idea of circumventing the state and building an anarchist societyorganized only by the market (Popper, 2016).
Such techno-utopianism often hasbeen dubbed the “Californian ideology” (Barbrook and Cameron, 1996).
At thisearly phase shortly after the inception of Bitcoin, its development resembled the32 M.
Hütten and M.
Thiemann“communitarian spirit of an open source project” (Wallace, 2011).
With nothingto purchase and hardly any exchanges operational, hoarding and tinkering werewhat were largely done with Bitcoin.
As the still unknown creator SatoshiNakamoto put it, users should get some Bitcoin “just in case it catches on” (citedin Vigna and Casey, 2015: 46).While early advocates viewed Bitcoin as a permanent challenge to territorialstate-backed currencies, the initial CC exhibited parallels with other local currencies.
Local currencies, such as the Chiemgauer (Thiel, 2011) or the Brixton Pound(Dodd, 2014: 380), predominantly focus on the role of money in facilitatingexchange, while seeking ways to discourage hoarding.
Bitcoin’s emergence asmoney began from hoarding, which helped Bitcoin to overcome the problem ofusers having to participate in an unproven payment network and allowed forgradually building confidence in the network.
The predominance of hoarding andthe importance of the specific ideological vision is echoed by the first institution,the Electronic Frontier Foundation, an international NGO advocating digital rights,have joined the money game of Bitcoin by accepting donations in Bitcoin.
Whenthe global digital money transfer firm PayPal was pressured into ceasing to processdonations to WikiLeaks in 2010, demonstrating the salience of the interconnectionof finance and government (Popper, 2016: 57), members of the Bitcoin communitycalled for WikiLeaks to accept donations through Bitcoin.
In 2011, Wikileaksbegan accepting donations through Bitcoin (Redman, 2016).
Circumventing statelimitations regarding particular transactions illustrates both the iterative characterof the money game of Bitcoin and how it was positioned as an alternative to established money games, insofar as the Bitcoin money game was visibly operatingoutside of established legal frameworks and institutions were influencing how thismoney game is played and what moves are viable.
The Bitcoin money game isiterative insofar as the game becomes more confrontational at this point, not justavoiding state regulation, but actively defying it and eventually alienating thecreator of Bitcoin.
WikiLeaks joining the Bitcoin money game contributed tothe departure of Satoshi Nakamoto, who seemingly did not foresee how rapidly theuptake of Bitcoin would progress (Wallace, 2011).Following the first adopters, non-state institutions emerged that were tightlylinked to the functioning of Bitcoin, actively developing business models that werebased on Bitcoin’s status as a money game at the margins of the dominant systemand in turn building the foundation of the Bitcoin ecosystem.
Various Bitcoinspecific financial intermediaries began to emerge, such as currency exchanges,mining pools, digital wallets, and transaction anonymizers (Böhme et al., 2015).Throughout this early phase, Bitcoin was hardly integrated with the formaleconomy.
Instead, it almost functioned as a catalyst for those inspired by the political vision of Bitcoin to build institutions that are strongly integrated with the functions of Bitcoin.
The biggest representatives of this development were Mt.Gox,SilkRoad, and SatoshiDice, all of which provided a service unique to this moneygame as well as the first broad institutional underpinning of Bitcoin.Mt.Gox4 allowed for the exchange of national currencies into units of Bitcoin.This exchange was one of the first to build standardized interfaces with otherMoneys at the margins 33money games, contributing to an increase in speculative activities in the processby allowing users to buy and sell units of Bitcoin more rapidly.
While there wereother exchanges in existence at the time, at its peak Mt.Gox handled almost 90percent of the traffic occurring on all exchanges combined (Wallace, 2011).
Itsattractiveness stemmed partly from the fact that it avoided financial regulation ofboth the jurisdiction in which it was located and the regions in which its customers resided, including anti-money-laundering regulations and “know yourcustomer” requirements.
However, Mt.Gox reintroduced third-party intermediation and concentration to a degree that the exchange began acting as de factobank for Bitcoin users, marking the first notable departure from the initial visionof Bitcoin that had insisted on a lack of third-party intermediation.
The risks ofsuch intermediation became evident when eventually Mt.Gox filed for bankruptcy with Japanese authorities in 2014, causing the loss of 850,000 BTC andthereby demonstrating the inherent risks in the money game of Bitcoin at thattime (Dierksmeier and Steele, 2016).The importance of Mt.Gox for this phase was rivaled only by the emergenceof the black market vendor SilkRoad.
Originally founded in 2011 by RossUlbricht, the service was quick to gain traction by allowing users and vendors topredominantly exchange various narcotics for BTC (Bearman, 2015).
SilkRoadwas a truly unique advance from the mailing of narcotics around the globe toindividual customers that was previously hampered by the lack of a reliable andanonymous payment channel.
Furthermore, Ulbricht explicitly identified stronglyas a libertarian who was intrigued by the Bitcoin proposal.
SilkRoad was incentivized by the prospect of Bitcoin circumventing existing regulations of financialtransactions.
Once again, the Bitcoin money game shifted in a novel direction,furthering access to services conflicting with rules outlined in other moneygames and bolstering a particular confrontational interpretation of the Bitcoinmoney game.
Eventually, the FBI caught up with the creator of SilkRoad, whichled to the arrest of Ulbricht in 2013 and the subsequent closure of the originalSilkRoad.At the time of SilkRoad’s closure, other illicit and legitimate services had begunto flourish in the Bitcoin ecosystem.
SatoshiDice emerged as a popular gamblingservice in 2012, harnessing the technological benefits of Bitcoin and the underlying blockchain.5 SatoshiDice utilizes the fact that the maintenance of the publicledger of Bitcoin continuously produces randomized numbers, allowing users toplace reliable online bets without having to trust in the soundness of a third-partycode.
At the time, SatoshiDice was responsible for about 50 percent of the volumeoccurring in Bitcoin transactions (Matonis, 2013).
Other vendors offered access togames such as blackjack or roulette where BTC was used as wager.
Partiallyattracted by the weak formal regulation of Bitcoin, these vendors built on the keyproperties of Bitcoin, predominantly privacy, payment irreversibility, and costsavings, rendering it the ideal digital casino chip (Matonis, 2013).While once thousands of BTC could be bought for a few dollars, or evencents, the price of the leading CC skyrocketed in the two years following theinception of SilkRoad and Mt.Gox.
The development emphasized the dual nature34 M.
Hütten and M.
Thiemannof Bitcoin as both a payment network and a speculative asset (Glaser et al.,2014).
This phase also illustrated the importance of ideological convictions inparticipating in a particular alternative money game.
Why would anyone placetrust in the Bitcoin money game? We find continuous references to Bitcoin asfinally allowing people to switch over to what they believe “good” money lookslike (e.g., Popper, 2016: 53ff.).
As a concept of money, Bitcoin resembles “freebanking” ideas previously popular in the pre-1914 era allowing for any bank toissue money and have market forces control its value (Helleiner, 2003: 4), aswell as ideas of commodity money or commodity-backed money, such as anidealized gold standard removing money supply from governmental control.Bitcoin could also benefit from existing interest in privacy in ownership throughcryptography, while not requiring a firm commitment of resources or any noteworthy initial investment to participate beyond having access to a computer withan internet connection.Bitcoin also built on the (re-)emerging distrust in other money games.
Withthe proposal of a decentralized and hard-capped money game, Bitcoin positioneditself in stark contrast to established money games at the time.
Events such asthe Cyprus crisis of 2012/13 made citizens painfully aware of the previouslyinvisible political dimensions of the dominant money games.
This crisis led to asteep rise of interest in Bitcoin-related apps, especially in countries suspected tohave a troubled banking sector (Luther and Olson, 2013: 25ff.).
However, spikesin interest do not necessarily produce spikes of adoption.Throughout this early adoption period, moves in the Bitcoin money gamewere often transactions strongly regulated or outright forbidden in other moneygames, such as gambling and the purchase of illicit goods.
The Bitcoin moneygame was a money game emerging at the margins of current regulatory frameworks and legal spaces of legitimate money use.
Yet, while notions of empowerment and self-determination are common amongst advocates, Bitcoin was nevera project developed by the financially vulnerable or excluded.
Instead, Bitcoinhas been driven by a tech-savvy predominantly male elite, or, more generally, bygroups otherwise understood as privileged, not marginalized.Furthermore, the motive of financial speculation has been present from thevery beginning of Bitcoin.
The emerging institutional underpinning changed themoney game of the original CC, causing shifts in the governance of Bitcoinwithout altering the base computer code.
Various institutions ended up reintroducing the very third-party intermediation Bitcoin was meant to displace.While this allowed for the Bitcoin money game to interface with other moneygames (predominantly through unregulated exchanges), this re-intermediationsoftened the initial political vision of Bitcoin.
A niche market emerged withinthe Bitcoin money game driven by overlapping normative (crypto-anarchism,libertarians, gold bugs) and strategic (profits, law avoidance, cost savings) considerations.
Bitcoin’s followers were “fighting the good fight” against perceivedoppression and restrictions of the dominant money game.6Moneys at the margins  35The horizontal integration phase (2012–15)The second phase of the Bitcoin money, which can be described as the “horizontal integration phase,” can be characterized by two main currents.
The horizontal integration phase was marked by a notable departure from the moreconfrontational tone of the earlier phase as well as a steep increase in strategicmotives for taking part in the Bitcoin money game, which was often combinedwith only a secondary interest in the actual usage of Bitcoin.
Most notably,there was an increasingly publicly announced interest in Bitcoin by key incumbents in the global IT sector.
Firms such as Baidu and eBay, and the acceptance of Bitcoin through Overstock.com, among other companies, representedthe development of Bitcoin throughout this phase.
We look at the positiontaking of each in turn.One of the first big companies to accept Bitcoin was Baidu, a Chinese internetsearch giant and the Chinese equivalent to Google.
Contrasting the start-upsmarking the first phase located at the fringes or in the shadows of the formaleconomy, Baidu was anything but unheard of.
With Baidu having a market capitalization of $53 billion, recognition of Bitcoin came from a giant of the internetindustry.
Baidu Jiasule, a subdivision of Baidu selling cloud storage, allowedcustomers to make BTC payments for this service.
In its public announcement,Baidu addressed Bitcoin as a “trendy” technology with which they wanted toassociate and less as a political proposal that could challenge government authority and control of the money supply.7 Baidu’s support hence stands in stark contrast to the strong anti-government sentiment prevalent among the libertariansand crypto-anarchists of the initial phase.
Instead, Baidu is known for its willingcompliance with requests from Chinese censors and has been at the center ofother scandals fueling calls for boycott by Chinese citizens (Huang, 2016).8Nonetheless, its position-taking towards Bitcoin seemed to indicate a possiblemainstream adoption of the Bitcoin money game.Another strong signal of support came from then eBay president JohnDonahoe, who argued that Bitcoin would become a “very powerful thing” thatthe firm was closely monitoring.
While he made clear that there were no immediate plans for integrating Bitcoin with either eBay or its subsidiary PayPal,Donahoe’s interest in Bitcoin signaled that Bitcoin was a viable technologicalinnovation with possibly disruptive consequences.
This heightened exposure ofBitcoin also fueled the speculative interests of incumbents of the IT industry andgreatly increased the visibility of the Bitcoin money game.
Yet this came with asevere shift in the framing of Bitcoin.Instead of (explicitly) endorsing Bitcoin as a political experiment, incumbentfirms drew on the less confrontational framing of Bitcoin as a borderlesspayment network.
They endorsed a disruptive innovation, not a political movement.
Previous research indicates that signals from high-status actors are key fordriving the adoption of a new technology (Podolny, 2008).
The reciprocal relationship allows for incumbent firms to signal that they sense developing trendsby associating with Bitcoin.
Nonetheless, it is very notable that the incumbent36 M.
Hütten and M.
Thiemannendorsement was much more driven by strategic than explicitly normative considerations.
Furthermore, contrasting the start-ups of Phase I, this time aroundadoption was superficial and no commitments to “fighting the good fight” weremade, other than overhauling the dated IT infrastructure of existing paymentchannels.
This openness also has been a fundamental characteristic of Bitcoin,setting it apart from other, more strictly regional currencies.
While Bitcoinstarted from strong normative demands regarding privacy, disintermediation, andself-determination of money users, almost no commitment or changes in conducthonoring these demands are required from firms that began to accept BTCpayments.9A more mixed endorsement reminiscent of Phase I came from Overstock.comadopting Bitcoin.
Overstock.com was the first major retailer to accept paymentsin BTC for its entire range of goods.
Overstock.com CEO and Chairman PatrickByrne supported Bitcoin not only as a technological innovation but also as apolitical cause (Metz, 2014).
Others to join the Bitcoin money game by allowingcustomers to pay in BTC for a limited range of goods and services wereOkCupid, Virgin Galactic, and TigerDirect.
Mike Maxim, chief technologyofficer of OkCupid, described Bitcoin as a way to “differentiate their productfrom other dating sites.” Judd Bagley, director of communications for Overstock.com, also stressed how their Bitcoin adoption not only generated presscoverage, but also led to members of the Bitcoin community advertising Overstock.com to other users (Bogle, 2014).
Other companies in this second phase ofthe evolution to accept Bitcoin were Dell, Expedia, Shopify, Wordpress, Reddit,and Mega (Dodd, 2014: 365).Once again we can return to the question of why anyone would place trustinto Bitcoin.
While government agencies began to crack down on the moredeviant organizations of Phase I, incumbent firms began to take an interest inBitcoin, furthering the institutional underpinning of Bitcoin by linking it withsections of the formal economy and fueling hopes of mainstream adoption andbuilding methodical trust.
Strong initial political demands (full anonymity,freedom from government, rule avoidance) were toned down by these incumbentcorporations in favor of more moderate voices.
The early involvement of manyinstitutions in Bitcoin was a taxing learning experience leading to arrests orfreezing of funds.
Conflicts with prosecutors gave the impression of severe lackof understanding the existing political and legal dimension of the financialsystem on the side of Bitcoin advocates and developers, leading for example toMt.Gox having its US accounts frozen.
A growing focus on Bitcoin as an efficient borderless payment network and increasing media coverage, as well ashopes for mainstream adoption, empowered more moderate voices in the Bitcoincommunity.Consequently (moderate) Bitcoin advocates were able to strike loose allianceswith powerful incumbent actors, the latter seeking to set themselves apart fromtheir competitors.
This division in the existing money game between unwelcomecriminal actors and welcome innovation was also echoed within the communityof Bitcoin users.
This was most strikingly illustrated by the creation of theMoneys at the margins 37Bitcoin Foundation, a non-profit that sought to develop standardization and unity inthe community, while departing from the more radical politics associated with theinitial phase of Bitcoin (Popper, 2016: 138ff.; Weber, 2016).
Frequently, the integration of Bitcoin as a payment option was superficial, and real-life adoption as ameans of payment has been stagnating ever since.10 With an eye on mainstreamadoption, other more practical concerns moved to the forefront, such as how toproperly tax Bitcoin earning without risking fallout with financial regulators.While Bitcoin as a technology is heavily imbued with political convictions(Golumbia, 2015), many advocates of Bitcoin began to perform a cognitive split,setting apart Bitcoin as a radical and conflict-laden political experiment fromBitcoin as a disruptive borderless payment network.
Once the latter framingbecame more pronounced, incumbent firms could more easily interface withBitcoin, thereby watering down the political proposal of Bitcoin and alienatingsome early supporters in the process.
Early experiences with exchanges movinginto the focus of prosecutors also led to attempts by some exchanges to becomemore compliant by gathering data on customers and by, for example, registeringwith the US Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (Popper, 2016: 138).Beyond first attempts of fending off Bitcoin as an illegitimate and law-avoidinginternet curiosity, incumbent firms also became involved in an alternativestrategy of “pacification” (Oliver, 1991, in Bernstein and Cashore, 2007) by creating new initiatives (e.g., the R3 consortium of 70 major banks in 2014exploring how to harness blockchain technology) seeking to adopt the technology through cooptation, while at the same time seeking to avoid its explicitlypolitical normative demands.
The cognitive differentiation between the controversial political experiment and welcome technological innovation that underliethis engagement would find its counterpart in the reception of Bitcoin in the regulatory community and lay the foundation for its legitimate integration withother money games.Vertical integration phase (since 2013)Regulatory responses to Bitcoin have always been more ambivalent than onemight have expected, considering its early framings as internet drug money(Chen, 2011).
Regulators found themselves in a position where they were to curbthe downsides of an unregulated and anonymous payment network withoutscaring off emerging fintech benefits.
As Lael Brainard, member of the Board ofGovernors of the Federal Reserve System, stated, “We will work together tofoster socially beneficial innovation, while insisting that risks are thoroughlyunderstood, managed, and controlled” (Brainard, 2016).
The early proposal ofthe Bitcoin money game was grossly at odds with existing regulation, eitherignoring it because of naivety and a lack of knowledge, or outright breaching itto facilitate illegal transactions.
Nonetheless, when the first widely receivedpublic hearing on Bitcoin was held by the US Senate Committee on HomelandSecurity and Governmental Affairs in November 2013, the American regulatoryenvironment proved generally flexible.
While concerns about drug trafficking38 M.
Hütten and M.
Thiemannand other prohibited activities were prominent, it became clear that Bitcoin wasalso considered a viable technological innovation by US officials (Raskin, 2013).This began the onset of a normalization process that separated Bitcoin transactions into cases of legitimate use and those of deviant conduct.
Firms and merchants in the Bitcoin ecosystem increasingly voiced their desire for stringentregulation of Bitcoin.
This group of actors was faced with the problem that evenwhen they wanted to comply with regulation, it was unclear what exactly wasrequired from them.
As a pre-eminent American technology commentator put it:Bitcoin businesses – particularly those involved in trading bitcoins fordollars – sometimes complain that they operate in a grey area, where it’s notentirely clear how or if they are in compliance with a patchwork of state andfederal regulations.(McMillan, 2013)Reoccurring experiences with theft and fraud had also left many users morewilling to consider the upsides of more stringent regulation.
However, theBitcoin money game was also stuck in an odd spot.
While broader sets of individuals and firms took an interest in Bitcoin throughout Phase II, horizontal integration was stagnating as Bitcoin did not seem to move towards building acritical mass when it came to actual adoption.
Yet, excitement about the underlying technology, the blockchain, was nonetheless building:Nevertheless, there is growing recognition that the lasting legacy of Bitcoinmost likely lies in the technological advances made possible by its protocolfor computation and communication that facilitates payments and transfers.(Lo and Wang, 2014)State regulatory responses are closely tied to the second cognitive split occurringwith Bitcoin during this phase.
On the one hand, Bitcoin had been associatedwith crime, money laundering, and scandal.
On the other hand, blockchainintrigued incumbents of the financial industry and government agencies (Maurer,2016: 85ff.).
In contrast with the more controversial Bitcoin, blockchain technology has seen a steep increase in legitimacy and uptake (for a more detaileddepiction, see Campbell-Verduyn, 2017).
Nonetheless, because blockchain is thetechnology underpinning Bitcoin, separating the policy response from theBitcoin has been virtually impossible.
Instead, government agencies both inEurope and in the US seem to be willing to consider a trade-off where they avoidoutright prohibition in favor of pushing for a normalization of the Bitcoin moneygame.
Furthermore, overtly strict regulation would risk quickly driving Bitcoinactivity elsewhere, weakening the grip of regulators on the institutions and intermediaries developing in this ecosystem (Böhme et al., 2015).There has yet to be a stringent international regulation on Bitcoin.
Regulationgenerally varies on a country-to-country basis.11 Often some sort of legal definition as money of Bitcoin is acknowledged.
This is not so much a scholasticMoneys at the margins 39debate as a question of taxation.
For example, based on Sweden’s tax officechallenging a court decision, the Court of Justice of the European Union ruledthat Bitcoins are exempt from value-added tax, rendering Bitcoin to be currencyinstead of a commodity (Clinch, 2015).
However, Bitcoin’s wider recognition asa currency by state authorities has been limited and commonly accompanied bysteep warnings about the volatility and risks of virtual currencies, as well as concerns about central banks’ authority on monetary policy.
Generally, governmentagencies demand compliance with anti-money-laundering and know your customer regulations (see Campbell-Verduyn and Goguen, this volume).On occasion, payments in BTC have been accepted by government agencies.For example, in the Swiss city of Zug, citizens were allowed to pay governmentservices of up to 200 Swiss francs in BTC.
However, this development is mostlyowed to Switzerland seeking to foster a sort of blockchain Silicon Valley, orcrypto valley, and has limited implications for the general acceptance of Bitcoinby state agencies.12 On occasion, Bitcoin has also been endorsed by hedge fundmanagers as something that should be included in modern portfolios, andCameron and Tyler Winkelvoss sought to get a Bitcoin exchange trading fund(ETF) approved by the US Securities and Exchange Commission (Roberts,2017).
While the filing for the ETF was rejected on the grounds of finding theBitcoin market still insufficiently regulated, it was also indicated that this rulingmight change in the future as Bitcoin markets become more regulated (Shin,2017).
What should be emphasized here is the productive site of regulatorypower.
As with many previous conflict-laden financial practices, it is politicalauthority that creates moral and legal space for financial markets to operate andconsolidates and legalizes a professional domain for particular financial practices(De Goede, 2005: 124).The creation of such a moral and legal framework does not only concernprivate enterprises.
Bitcoin has been increasingly identified with the long-helddreams of central bank control tied to the abandonment of cash altogether.
TheEuropean Central Bank (2015: 27) pointed to the possibility that a major failureof an established virtual currency could harm the trust in e-money altogether.Bitcoin greatly contributed to “destigmatizing” the concept of a cashless societyby making digital money cash-like (Kaminska, in Smith, 2014).
As central bankscontemplate the idea of issuing their own central bank-backed CCs, they mightneed to shape the regulatory framework that sets the ground for a lasting verticalintegration of Bitcoin and other CCs as well.Moneys at the marginsWhat we also have witnessed more widely in the last decade is the prevalence ofthree unique trends: first, an increased interest in free banking and frictionlesse-commerce payments; second, increased interest in communitarian regional currencies as permanent reform movements (Helleiner, 2003; Ingham, 2002); third,the vast spread of special purpose moneys issued by private enterprises, such as airmiles and supermarket loyalty schemes (Dodd, 2015: 391), or companies such as40 M.
Hütten and M.
ThiemannAmazon, Google, Apple, Alipay, Groupon, and others issuing their own paymentoptions to increase consumer loyalty and market share (Mariotto and Verdier,2015: 15).The Bitcoin money game has benefited from all three of these trends in itsgrowth and diffusion.
Bitcoin’s evolution has been building on the increasedinterest in free banking and a permanent reform movement creating a better formof money.
It has been exploited as a form of special purpose money by companies seeking free advertising, and it has been promoted as a frictionlesse-commerce payment network.
Therefore, it is decisive to look at how Bitcoindeveloped over time and what developments it set in motion that reach beyondthe CC (Table 2.1).Originally, Bitcoin started off as a strong political experiment gaining supportfrom activists, “believers,” and an emerging shadow economy providing first-usecases for this money game.
Actors displayed both normative and strategic convictions, and Bitcoin was challenging established (national and supranational)money games.
The weaker second phase of the horizontal integration of Bitcoinamongst firms closer to the formal economy followed.
Incumbent firms with anIT affinity positioned themselves towards the emergent money game.
However,while Bitcoin resonates with crypto-anarchist ideals (Ludlow, 2001), politicalgoals became less pronounced and focus on borderless payments and technological innovation decreased.
Voices in favor of circumventing regulation havebecome less vocal.
Furthermore, incumbent firms show much less commitmentto Bitcoin than the start-ups of Phase I in only superficially integrating Bitcoinas one payment option among many for a limited range of (often virtual) goods.Adoptions as a medium of exchange and the subsequent horizontal integrationhave largely stagnated.
Instead, state actors have become more prominentlyinvolved.Further formal regulatory action must be taken considering the shadoweconomy of Bitcoin.
Regulators must curb the downsides of Bitcoin to harnessthe emerging greater blockchain environment.
The evolution of the Bitcoinmoney game parallels the development of the blockchain as an emergent technology, but it is not synonymous with it.
Rather, private and state actors seem to bebuilding an infrastructure that benefits Bitcoin as they move towards developinga framework that allows them to harness the emerging technology (Rotolo et al.,2015) in general.
Yet, commitment by state actors in the US and Europe hasbeen predominantly provisional in the sense described by Jacqueline Best(2014), which allows regulators to embrace the emergence of blockchain technologies while revising or revoking should negative future events occur or newdangers become apparent.The Bitcoin money game started from confrontation, but then showed signsof cooptation when incumbent firms reframed the meaning of Bitcoin.
Evenmore important in shaping this money game is the prospective normalizationthrough powerful state actors starting to build a legal framework for cryptocurrencies.
Bitcoin was caught in a trade-off where it had to forgo some explicitnormative demands to interface with other money games and the formalTable 2.1 Evolution of the Bitcoin money gamePhase Motivation of keyinstitutionsKey institutions Positioning of theBitcoin money gameBitcoin framing by keyinstitutionsCommitment to Bitcoinby key institutionsIntroduction(2009–14)Normative+strategic Shadow economy Confrontation Political challenge StrongHorizontal integration(2012–15)Strategic Incumbent merchants Cooptation Borderless paymentnetworkWeakVertical integration(since 2013)Strategic Government agencies Normalization Distributed ledgertechnologyProvisionalSource: the authors.42 M.
Hütten and M.
Thiemanneconomy.
From then on, explicit normative demands did not vanish, butdecreased in favor of broader adoption and regulatory compliance.
This is not tosay that there are not plenty of Bitcoin “believers” still looking to Bitcoin as apolitical experiment allowing them to put their money where their politicalbeliefs stand.
However, in actuality, Bitcoin does not seem to have delivered onthe aspects that fuel this enthusiasm.
Instead, the Bitcoin environment has beenhighly centralized in terms of funds, expertise, and authority (Atzori, 2017), andhas even bred what some call a “Bitcoin aristocracy” (Varoufakis, 2013).Bitcoin has been a continuous exercise of building an institutional underpinning.
First, we find a shadow economy rendering Bitcoin almost as a specialpurpose money, allowing for transactions that are otherwise sanctioned or notpossible in other money games.
In this process, Bitcoin empowers marginalfigures of society and marginalized ideologies and activities insofar as they weretechnologically proficient enough to participate in the money game.
Second,Bitcoin was used by incumbent firms for a limited range of goods, raising hopesof horizontal integration with a broad set of merchants.
In this phase, marginalfigures and ideologies are pushed aside for an ideology more fitting with legitimate commerce and the mainstream belief in technological progress (trendytechnology).
Third, Bitcoin is becoming increasingly integrated with the regulatory frameworks, for example in Europe and the US.
Here, the cooptation ofBitcoin becomes nearly complete, seeking to eradicate both illicit activities aswell as illicit ideologies.The development of Bitcoin is paralleled by the ever-present role of it as aspeculative asset rather than as a medium of exchange, and each step in the evolution of Bitcoin as a money game leads to the appreciation of Bitcoin as anobject of speculation (Glaser et al., 2014).
Once again, why would someone trustBitcoin based on this phase of the money game? One simple answer is that stagnant real-life adoption has been offset by a lasting speculative interest in Bitcoin,in particular now that we have seen almost a decade of a lingering financialcrisis.
Another answer is that government agencies might drag Bitcoin alongwhile they make their way to harbor coming financial technology (fintech)innovations.
Adoption of Bitcoin could be driven by states stepping in as thegreat equalizer, bestowing (some) political authority upon Bitcoin.Considering our focus on money games, the third phase strongly links Bitcointo the dominant money games.
One of Bitcoin’s most lasting achievements hasbeen how it has shaped the wider debate surrounding virtual moneys.
More thanany other form of electronic money, Bitcoin has sparked debates on the materiality of virtual money (e.g., Selgin, 2015; Maurer et al., 2013).
Central bankinterest now goes beyond the question of how to properly regulate CCs likeBitcoin.
Instead, central banks actively explore the possibility of making thetransition to central-bank-issued “digital currency” (Mersch, 2016).
Bitcoin hasbecome a primer for a cashless society, opening up a debate that might transformthe dominant money game it was meant to challenge while at the same time providing the technology that could become the foundation of this transition.
Thefuture of digital currency connects with long-held dreams of phasing out paperMoneys at the margins 43money altogether (Rogoff, 2014).
Despite claims about decentralization and anonymity, Bitcoin has introduced a tremendously auditable and transparent digitalpayment system.
Increasingly, research output from central banks and othermonetary institutions such as the International Monetary Fund explore how theend of cash can be effected and how blockchains could take a role in achievingthis end (Barrdear and Kumhof, 2016; Kireyev, 2017).
Bitcoin could end upgreatly empowering the central banks already located at the apex of power, significantly expanding their capacity to administer (unconventional) monetarypolicy.
Eventually, Bitcoin could contribute towards fortifying the dominantmoney game it was meant to challenge and transforming the global governanceof money flows in a manner far removed from its original vision.AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank Malcolm Campbell-Verduyn for his insightful commentsand his invaluable work putting this volume together.
We would also like tothank the participants of the “Bitcoin and Beyond” workshop at the BalsillieSchool of International Affairs for their comments and discussion on an earlierdraft.
This chapter benefited from a EURIAS fellowship at the Paris Institute forAdvanced Studies (France), co-funded by Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions,under the European Union’s 7th Framework Programme for research, and fromfunding from the French State managed by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche, programme “Investissements d’avenir” (ANR-11-LABX-0027–01 LabexRFIEA+).Notes1 https://99bitcoins.com/bitcoinobituaries/ (retrieved on March 4, 2017).2 BTC is common shorthand for units of Bitcoin and will be used as such throughoutthe chapter.3 http://coinmarketcap.com/ (retrieved on March 4, 2017).4 The domain Mtgox.com was originally registered by an American, Jed McCaleb, in2007 with the intention of creating an online exchange for Magic: The Gatheringgame cards; however, it was never used for that purpose.
In 2010, McCaleb turned thewebsite into a Bitcoin online exchange where buyers and sellers of Bitcoins could bematched.
Confronted with the tremendously fast growth of his platform, McCalebdecided he was “in over his head” (McMillan, 2014) and sold the platform.5 SatoshiDice reported first-year earnings of 33,310 BTC.
During the year, players bet atotal of 1,787,470 in 2,349,882 individual bets at an average monthly growth rate of78 percent.
Earnings were calculated from eight months of data covering May toDecember 2012 (Matonis, 2013).6 The development of the Bitcoin money game insofar can be compared with thebroader theme of the establishment of non-state-marked driven governance standards,which has also inspired our analysis of the Bitcoin money game (Bernstein andCashore, 2007).7 For a translation of the announcement by Baidu, see: www.coindesk.com/chineseinternet-giant-baidu-starts-accepting-bitcoin/8 Baidu stopped accepting Bitcoin only two months later when Chinese regulatorsrestricted financial institutions from handling Bitcoin transactions.44 M.
Hütten and M.
Thiemann9 Martin Gauss of Air Baltic addressed this issue most explicitly when he justified hiscompany’s acceptance of payments in Bitcoin as driven by the outlook of the resulting press coverage, granting an advertisement a company of this size could otherwisenot afford.
The commitment was therefore superficial insofar as all incoming payments were immediately exchanged into euro currency by a third party handling thetransactions (see Koenen, 2015).10 Websites such as coinmap.org still only list about 8,700 venues worldwide at the timeof writing, often including small and local businesses offering a very limited range ofproducts.11 www.loc.gov/law/help/bitcoin-survey/12 www.coindesk.com/blockchain-innovation-switzerland-crypto-valley-new-york/BibliographyAglietta, M.
(2002).
Whence and wither money? In OECD (ed.) The future of money(pp.
123–45).
Paris: OECD.Aglietta, M., and Orléan, A.
(1984).
La violence de la monnaie.
Paris: Presses Univ.
deFrance.Atzori, M.
(2017).
Blockchain technology and decentralized governance: Is the state stillnecessary? Journal of Governance and Regulation, 6(1), 45–62.Barbrook, R., and Cameron, A.
(1996).
Californian ideology.
In P.
Ludlow (ed.) Cryptoanarchy, cyberstates, and pirate utopias.
Boston: MIT Press.Barrdear, J., and Kumhof, M.
(2016).
The macroeconomics of central bank issued digitalcurrencies.
BoE Staff Working Paper 605.Bearman, J.
(2015).
The rise and fall of Silkroad.
Part 1.
Retrieved October 6, 2015, fromwww.wired.com/2015/04/silk-road-1/Bell, S.
(2001).
The role of the state and the hierarchy of money.
Cambridge Journal ofEconomics, 25(2), 149–63.Bernstein, S., and Cashore, B.
(2007).
Can non-state global governance be legitimate? Ananalytical framework.
Regulation and Governance, 1(4), 347–71.Best, J.
(2014) Governing failure: Provisional expertise and the transformation of globaldevelopment finance.
New York: Cambridge University Press.Bogle, A.
(2014).
Is accepting Bitcoin just a publicity stunt for companies? RetrievedMay 8, 2017, from www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2014/02/05/overstock_virgin_galactic_tiger_direct_and_others_help_make_bitcoin_mainstream.htmlBöhme, R., Christin, N., Edelman, B., and Moore, T.
(2015).
Bitcoin: Economics, technology, and governance.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(2), 213–38.Brainard, L.
(2016, October 7).
Distributed ledger technology: Implications for payments,clearing, and settlement.
Speech at the Institute of International Finance AnnualMeeting Panel on Blockchain, Washington, D.C.Campbell-Verduyn, M.
(2017, February 24).
Technology, authority, and global governance.
Paper presented to annual conference of the International Studies Association,Baltimore, USA.Carruthers, B.G., and Babb, S.
(1996).
The color of money and the nature of value:Greenbacks and gold in postbellum America.
American Journal of Sociology, 101(6),1556–91.Cartelier, J.
(2013).
Beyond modern academic theory of money.
In F.
Ulgen, R.
Tortajada, M.
Meaulle, and R.
Stellian (eds.) New contributions to monetary analysis: Thefoundations of an alternative economic paradigm.
London: Routledge.Chen, A.
(2011).
The underground website where you can buy any drug imaginable.Moneys at the margins  45Retrieved May 8, 2017, from http://gawker.com/the-underground-website-where-youcan-buy-any-drug-imag-30818160Chick, V.
(2013).
The current banking crisis in the UK: An evolutionary view.
In J.Pixley and G.
Harcourt (eds.) Financial crises and the nature of capitalist money:Mutual developments from the work of Geoffrey Ingham (pp.
148–61).
London: Palgrave Macmillan.Clinch, M.
(2015).
Bitcoin now tax-free in Europe after court ruling.
Retrieved May 8,2017, from www.cnbc.com/2015/10/22/bitcoin-now-tax-free-in-europe-after-courtruling.htmlCox, J.
(2013).
Bitcoin and digital currencies: The new world of money and freedom.New York: Laissez Faire Books.De Goede, M.
(2005).
Virtue, fortune, and faith: A geneaology of finance.
Minneapolis:University of Minnesota Press.Dierksmeier, C., and Seele, P.
(2016).
Cryptocurrencies and business ethics.
Journal ofBusiness Ethics, pp.
1–14.Dodd, N.
(1994).
The sociology of money: Economics, reason and contemporary society.Cambridge: Polity Press.Dodd, N.
(2014).
The social life of money.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.Dodd, N.
(2015).
Utopianism and the future of money.
In P.
Aspers, and N.
Dodd (eds.)Re-imagining economic sociology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.European Central Bank.
(2012).
Virtual currency schemes.
Frankfurt: Author.European Central Bank.
(2015).
Virtual currency schemes – a further analysis.
Frankfurt:Author.Ganssmann, H.
(2002).
Das Geldspiel.
In C.
Deutschmann (ed.) Die gesellschaftlichemacht des geldes.
Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.Ganssmann, H.
(2012a).
Doing money: Elementary monetary theory from a sociologicalstandpoint.
London: Routledge.Ganssmann, H.
(2012b).
Geld und die rationalität wirtschaftlichen handelns.
In A.
Engels,and L.
Knoll (eds.) Wirtschaftliche rationalität (pp.
221–39).
Wiesbaden: VS Verlagfür Sozialwissenschaften.Glaser, F., Zimmermann, K., Haferkorn, M., Weber, M.C., and Siering, M.
(2014).Bitcoin – asset or currency? Revealing users’ hidden intentions.
London: ECIS.Golumbia, D.
(2015).
Bitcoin as politics: Distributed right-wing extremism.
In G.
Lovink,N.
Tkacz, and P.
De Vries (eds.) MoneyLab reader: An intervention in digital economy.Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures.Graeber, D.
(2011).
Debt: The first 5000 years.
Vienna: Eurozine.Helleiner, E.
(2003).
The making of national money: Territorial currencies in historicalperspective.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.Huang, Z.
(2016).
Chinese citizens are boycotting search engine Baidu – and praying forGoogle to come back.
Quartz.
Retrieved May 8, 2017, from https://qz.com/593120/chinese-citizens-are-boycotting-search-engine-baidu-and-praying-for-google-to-comeback/Ingham, G.
(2002).
New monetary spaces? In OECD.
(ed.) The future of money(pp.
123–45).
Paris: OECD.Ingham, G.
(2004).
The nature of money.
Cambridge: Polity Press.Ingham, G.
(2006).
Further reflections on the ontology of money: Responses to Lapavitsas and Dodd.
Economy and Society, 35(2), 259–78.Ingham, G.
(2007).
The specificity of money.
European Journal of Sociology, 48(2),265–72.46 M.
Hütten and M.
ThiemannJeong, S.
(2013).
The Bitcoin protocol as law, and the politics of a stateless currency.Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2294124 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2294124Keynes, J.M.
(1971).
Treatise on money: Pure theory of money, Vol.
I.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Kireyev, A.P.
(2017).
The macroeconomics of de-cashing.
IMF Working Paper No.
17/71.Knafo, S.
(2013).
The making of modern finance: Liberal governance and the goldstandard.
Abingdon: Routledge.Knapp, G.F.
(1924).
The state theory of money.
London: Routledge.Koenen, J.
(2015, February 17).
Allein über den Wolken.
Air Baltic zeigt, dass auchkleine Fluggesellschaften überleben können – zumindest eine Zeit lang.
In.
Handelsblatt.Lo, S., and Wang, C.J.
(2014).
Bitcoin as money? Current Policy Perspectives, No.
14–4.Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, MA.Ludlow, P.
(2001).
Crypto anarchy, cyberstates, and pirate utopias.
Boston: MIT Press.Luther, W.J., and Olson, J.
(2013).
Bitcoin is memory.
Journal of Prices and Markets,3(3), 22–33.Mariotto, C., and Verdier, M.
(2015).
Innovation and competition in internet and mobilebanking: An industrial organization perspective.
Communication and Strategies, 99,129–46.Matonis, J.
(2013).
Bitcoin casinos release 2012 earnings.
Forbes.
Retrieved May 8,2017, from www.forbes.com/sites/jonmatonis/2013/01/22/bitcoin-casinos-release2012-earnings/Maurer, B.
(2016).
Re-risking in realtime.
On possible futures for finance after the blockchain.
Behemonth – A Journal on Civilisation, 9(2), 82–96.Maurer, B., Nelms, T.C., and Swartz, L.
(2013).
“When perhaps the real problem ismoney itself!”: The practical materiality of Bitcoin.
Social Semiotics, 23(2), 261–77.McMillan, R.
(2013).
Feds reveal what they really think about Bitcoin.
Wired.
RetrievedMay 8, 2017, from www.wired.com/2013/11/bitcoin_feds/McMillan, R.
(2014).
The inside story of Mt.Gox, Bitcoin’s $460 million disaster.
Wired.Retrieved May 8, 2017, from www.wired.com/2014/03/bitcoin-exchange/Mehrling, P.
(2013).
The inherent hierarchy of money.
In L.
Taylor, A.
Rezai, and T.Michl (eds.) Social fairness and economics: Economic essays in the spirit of DuncanFoley (pp.
394–404).
London: Routledge.Menger, K.
(1892).
On the origin of money.
Economic Journal, 2(6), 239–55.Mersch, Y.
(2016).
Distributed ledger technology: Role and relevance of the ECB.Retrieved May 8, 2017, from www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp161206.en.htmlMetz, C.
(2014).
The grand experiment goes live: Overstock.com is now accepting Bitcoins.
Wired.
Retrieved May 8, 2017, from www.wired.com/2014/01/overstockbitcoin-live/Mirowski, P.
(1991).
Postmodernism and the social theory of value.
Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, 13(4), 565–82.Nakamoto, S.
(2008).
Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system.
Retrieved August18, 2017, from https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdfPaul, A.T.
(2012).
Die gesellschaft des geldes: Entwurf einer monetären theorie dermodern.
Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.Paul, A.T.
(2016).
Bitcoin vs.
sovereign money: On the lure and limits of monetaryreforms.
Behemoth – A Journal on Civilisation, 9(2), 8–21.Moneys at the margins 47Podolny, J.M.
(2008).
Status signals: A sociological study of market competition.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.Popper, N.
(2015).
Digital gold: The untold story of Bitcoin.
London: Penguin Books.Raskin, M.
(2013).
U.S.
agencies to say Bitcoins offer legitimate benefits.
Bloomberg.Retrieved May 8, 2017, from www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-11-18/ u-sagencies-to-say-bitcoins-offer-legitimate-benefitsRedman, J.
(2016).
WikiLeaks has raised 4,000 BTC since 2011.
Retrieved May 8, 2017,from https://news.bitcoin.com/wikileaks-raised-4000-btc-since-2011/Roberts, J.J.
(2017).
Bitcoin may go boom: A guide to this week’s big SEC decision(update).
Fortune.
Retrieved May 8, 2017, from http://fortune.com/2017/03/09/bitcoinsec-etf/Rogoff, K.
(2014, April 11).
Costs and benefits to phasing out paper currency.
Presentedat NBER Macroeconomics Annual Conference, Harvard University.Rotolo, D., Hicks, D.
and Martin, B.
(2015).
What is an emerging technology? ResearchPolicy, 44(10), 1827–43.Selgin, G.
(2015).
Synthetic commodity money.
Journal of Financial Stability, 17, 92–9.Shin, L.
(2017).
SEC rejects Winklevoss Bitcoin ETF, sending price tumbling.
Forbes.Retrieved May 8, 2017, from www.forbes.com/sites/laurashin/2017/03/10/sec-rejectswinklevoss-bitcoin-etf-sending-price-tumbling/Smith, Y.
(2014).
How Bitcoin plays into the hands of central bankers and will facilitatethe use of negative interest rates.
Naked Capitalism.
Retrieved May 8, 2017, fromwww.nakedcapitalism.com/2014/01/bitcoin-plays-hands-central-bankers-willfacilitate-use-negative-interest-rates.htmlSwan, M.
(2015).
Blockchain: Blueprint for a new economy.
Farnham: O’Reilly Media.Thiel, C.
(2011).
Das ‚bessere’ Geld: Eine ethnographische Studie über Regionalwährungen.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag.Tumine, Z.
(2002).
The future technology of money.
In OECD.
(ed.) The future of money(pp.
123–45).
Paris: OECD.Varoufakis, Y.
(2013).
Bitcoin and the dangerous fantasy of apolitical money: Thoughtsfor the post-2008 world.
Retrieved May 8, 2017, from www.yanisvaroufakis.eu/2013/04/22/bitcoin-and-the-dangerous-fantasy-of-apolitical-money/Vigna, P., and Casey, M.J.
(2015).
The age of cryptocurrency: How Bitcoin and theblockchain are challenging the global economic order.
New York: Macmillan USA.Wallace, B.
(2011).
The rise and fall of Bitcoin.
Wired.
Retrieved May 8, 2017, fromwww.wired.com/2011/11/mf_bitcoin/Weber, B.
(2016).
Bitcoin and the legitimacy crisis of money.
Cambridge Journal of Economics, 40(1), 17–41.Zelizer, V.A.
(1997).
The social meaning of money: Pin money, paychecks, poor reliefand other currencies.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.3 The internal and externalgovernance of blockchain-basedorganizationsEvidence from cryptocurrenciesYing-Ying Hsieh, Jean-Philippe (JP) Vergne,and Sha WangIntroductionBlockchain technology proposes to create value by decentralizing the creation,verification, validation, and secure storage of economic transactions, both withinand between organizations.
Since 2015, central banks across the world areexploring the possibility of issuing money on a blockchain (Del Castillo, 2017).This could streamline monetary policy implementation at a global level, helpcombat counterfeiting and tax evasion, and potentially affect the business modelsof retail banks.While the changes that would result from implementing large-scale blockchain solutions are worth studying in themselves, we also need to gain a deeperunderstanding of how these blockchain solutions would be operated and bywhom.
Put simply, we need to ask: How does blockchain governance work, andwhat are the implications? To answer these questions, we look at the cryptocurrency setting and argue that cryptocurrencies represent the first real-worldinstances of blockchain-based organizations.
In this chapter, we thus shift thelevel of analysis from the global economy level to the organizational level.
Theorists define organizations as “collectivities oriented to the pursuit of relativelyspecific goals and exhibiting relatively highly formalized social structures”(Scott and Davis, 2007: 29), and in the following we use theory on organizational and corporate governance to unpack how blockchain-based organizationsoperate.In the organizational literature, corporate governance is defined as “the studyof power and influence over decision making within the corporation,” whichdefines the “rights and responsibilities of […] different stakeholders toward thefirm” (Aguilera and Jackson, 2010: 490).
Since cryptocurrencies reside to a largeextent in cyberspace, they are not embedded in the specific institutions of anyone country in particular.
As such, for the purpose of this study we treat them asglobal organizations (Lee, 2015: 380).
We anchor our arguments on the notionthat blockchain represents a new “institutional governance technology of decentralization” (MacDonald et al., 2016: 5) that can be implemented in various waysGovernance of blockchain-based organizations  49across blockchain-based organizations.
We then link these various implementations to a measure of organizational value-creation in order to assess their effectiveness for governance.Cryptocurrencies differ in terms of software design, ownership structure,decision rights, and degree of decentralization.
These variations in governancedesign features could have profound implications on investors’ evaluation of acryptocurrency’s value, as reflected in cryptocurrencies’ returns on investment.Indeed, prior research suggests that cryptocurrency returns are driven by muchmore than media hype and speculative behavior.
Wang and Vergne (2017) showthat the continuous improvement of the technology behind a cryptocurrency isthe primary predictor of price increases (as captured by weekly returns).
Thus,treating cryptocurrencies as traditional currencies or as commodities is misleading, since behind each cryptocurrency, there is a team of people who work hardto develop the technology.
For instance, whereas developers such as programmers and technologists write the blockchain software program, miners validateand update transactions by devoting computing power to the network.
In otherwords, cryptocurrencies are best conceived of as a new kind of transnationalorganization.
Understanding how these organizations then are governed is essential and will help devise formal policy recommendations at a macro level(Wright and De Filippi, 2015).Blockchain governance is about determining who has authority (internal andexternal actors); how these actors are endowed (e.g., ownership rights vs.
decision authority), in what form (formal and informal governance forms/structures),and at which level (Narayanan et al., 2016).
In the context of cryptocurrencies,whose success relative to one another is captured by superior market returns (arelative price increase from one period to the next), little is known about howinternal governance (at the blockchain and protocol levels) and external governance (by the broader cryptocurrency community) affect cryptocurrency returns.Drawing on the corporate governance literature in organizational and management studies, we thus examine the relationship between internal and externalgovernance design features and cryptocurrency returns.To shed light on this relationship empirically, we collected weekly panel dataon five cryptocurrencies with varying degrees of decentralization and predictweekly returns in regression models using a number of governance-level indicators.
In line with corporate governance research (Hambrick et al., 2008;Yermack, 2017), we look at several internal governance design choices: at theblockchain level, direct control by cryptocurrency owners over the consensusschemes; at the protocol level, the existence of formal voting mechanisms forminers to participate in decision-making; at the organizational level, the existence of centralized funding backing the cryptocurrency creators.
In addition, inline with the idea that the media act as agents of external governance for corporations (Aguilera et al., 2015; Walsh and Seward, 1990), we also study theeffects of both social (e.g., Reddit, Twitter, and Facebook) and traditional media(i.e., mainstream newspapers) governance on cryptocurrency returns, after controlling for a number of factors such as cryptocurrency supply and liquidity.50  Y.-Y.
Hsieh et al.Our findings reveal a paradoxical pattern, namely, decentralization at theblockchain level affects returns positively – as one would expect, since thepromise of blockchain is decentralization as a way to create value – but we alsofind that decentralization at both the protocol and organizational levels affectsreturns negatively.
This is to say, while decentralization stands as an importantvalue proposition that provides opportunities for the cryptocurrency community,this very feature can present challenges for investors.
Investors generally valuecommercialization opportunities managed by centralized organizations.
Theyalso have more confidence in financing coordinated through centralized fundingas a reliable source to motivate innovations.
In this regard, decentralizationbrings about different opportunities and challenges for various stakeholders.
Notunlike open source software projects, blockchain-based organizations can alsobe governed by decentralized communities, by centralized corporations, orjointly by both as hybrids.
Our findings imply a wide range of blockchain-basedorganizational governance design options, which address various implementation settings.
This study also highlights the need to investigate novel organizational forms, including “decentralized autonomous organizations” (DAO;DuPont, this volume).
In the following, we review the corporate governanceliterature, introduce cryptocurrency and our methodology, describe our analyses,and finally, we discuss our findings and contributions to the governanceliterature.Corporate governance: what we knowTo understand how cryptocurrencies redefine organizational governance, weneed to revisit the literature on corporate governance, which is concerned withorganizational goals and the control of organizational stakeholders on collectiveoutcomes (Aguilera et al., 2015; Aguilera et al., 2008; Moore and Kraatz, 2011;Williamson, 1996).
Corporate governance concerns “who rules” and “how theorganization is ruled” (Moore and Kraatz, 2011; Fama and Jensen, 1983; Hambrick et al., 2008).
Similar to any governance issues, corporate governance isgenerally about the allocation of power and control.
Historically, corporate governance has its economics roots in agency theory (Jensen and Meckling, 1976),which is concerned with mitigating opportunistic behavior.
This is to say,owners and managers of a corporation can have very different risk attitudes andpreferences.
While owners attend to profit maximization, managers are assumedto be self-interested and can engage in misconducts that benefit their own careeradvancement or compensation at the expense of owners’ benefits (Dalton et al.,2007).
In other words, for managers, individual benefits can significantly outweigh the concern of the organization’s profitability.
Therefore, the mainobjective for governance is to design contracts with incentive mechanisms thatoptimally allocate ownership rights, design ownership structures, and definecontrol such that interests are aligned between owners (principals) and managers(agents) (Connelly et al., 2010; Fama and Jensen, 1983; Jensen and Meckling,1976; Walsh and Seward, 1990).Governance of blockchain-based organizations  51Recent developments in the governance literature begin to embrace a broaderrange of roles for both internal and external organizational actors.
While internalactors include owners, shareholders, and managers, external actors include customers, the media, government, and the broader community.
These internal andexternal stakeholders can exert influence over the organization through not justeconomic but also social, behavioral, cultural, and political means (e.g., Aguileraet al., 2015; Dyck and Zingales, 2002; Dyck et al., 2008; Bednar et al., 2013;Hambrick et al., 2008).
In this view, organizational objectives are no longer tiedwith financial indicators capturing shareholder value such as stock returns, buttake into account other stakeholders as alternative forces of control (Aguilera etal., 2008; Aguilera et al., 2015).
When internal and external actors interactjointly, shareholder value maximization may not prevail anymore as the primarypurpose of the corporation.
Instead, corporations can also attend to corporatesocial performance, stakeholder orientations, restructuring, or asset redeployment as alternative objectives (Aguilera et al., 2015).Cryptocurrency governanceBlockchain-based organizations such as cryptocurrencies compete with traditional economic institutions by proposing alternative forms of organizationalgovernance (Davidson et al., 2016a, 2016b; Narayanan et al., 2016).
Specifically, they upset the traditional principal–agent relationships by placingmachines (i.e., the blockchain software program) at the core of organizationalgovernance, and human actors (i.e., stakeholders) at the edges (Buterin, 2014).Although humans are still involved in the creation, modification, and decisionmaking about the code, now formal organizational rules and routines are writtendirectly in the software program.
Instead of CEOs or top managers, it is coredevelopers who write the organizational rulebook of cryptocurrencies in the software code, in a decentralized fashion.
It is miners (or validators), rather thanemployees, who verify the validity of economic transactions and maintain a digitally shared, distributed ledger recording their history.
Incentives are not definedby employment contracts, but written in the code.
There are no headquarters orsubsidiaries, but a network distributed in cyberspace that is inherently global andborderless.
Coordination between stakeholders is lubricated by the exchange ofcryptocurrency tokens, whose value is determined by supply and demand, amongother things (Wang and Vergne, 2017).
Finally, each cryptocurrency is embedded in a digital community that plays an important external governance role.
Allthese stakeholders have power and govern the cryptocurrency at varying levelsin different ways (Narayanan et al., 2016; Yermack, 2017).
In short, blockchainbased governance in the context of cryptocurrencies calls for a revised understanding about power and control within the organizations.In the context of cryptocurrencies, not only is governance borderless, but alsodecentralized, albeit to various extents (Atzori, 2017; Yermack, 2017).
Anyonecan decide to “join” a public cryptocurrency organization, maintain and updatethe open ledger based on “competitive bookkeeping” such as mining or other52  Y.-Y.
Hsieh et al.consensus mechanisms (Yermack, 2017).
Admittedly, decentralization distinguishes blockchain-based corporate governance from the traditional model basedon hierarchies.
It is important to note that cryptocurrency governance modelscan exist in different degrees of decentralization.
Decentralization, on the onehand, creates value for cryptocurrencies as a peer-to-peer payment system thatdoes not rely on centralized financial intermediaries such as banks or paymentcompanies (Nakamoto, 2008).
On the other hand, decentralization can createexcessive inefficiencies as governance decisions are made without centralizedauthorities, but through consensus mechanisms in a non-hierarchical fashion.
Itis generally believed in economics that there is a trade-off between decentralization and efficiency.
For this reason, we think it is appropriate to think aboutblockchain-based corporate governance forms in terms of their degrees of decentralization.
We will follow this logic throughout our reasoning and analysis.Returns as a measure for cryptocurrency investors’ valueDemand for cryptocurrencies mainly stems from two sources: first, consumersand merchants using cryptocurrencies as a means of payment; and second, investors holding a cryptocurrency as an investment, hoping that the price will rise(Narayanan et al., 2016: 100, 173).
Here we focus on the latter, as the former,during our period of study, typically do not hold the cryptocurrency after thetransaction has occurred, and tend to use it mostly as a payment rail (i.e., as achannel for fast and efficient fiat currency transfers; Hileman and Rauchs, 2017).Just like corporate shareholders multiply a firm’s stock price by the number ofshares outstanding to determine market capitalization, cryptocurrency investorsmultiply a cryptocurrency’s price by the number of crypto-tokens in circulationto determine its market value (Narayanan et al., 2016).
According to agencytheory, the main objective of shareholders is their return on investment.
Yet whydo some cryptocurrencies generate more returns for investors than others? Sincethe overarching value proposition of cryptocurrencies is decentralization, weexamine how different governance design features imply varying degrees ofdecentralization across cryptocurrencies, and how they end up affecting returns.Cryptocurrency governance: internal and externalFollowing the corporate governance literature, we distinguish between the internaland external governance features of cryptocurrencies.
While the effectiveness ofinternal governance is typically rooted in the design of incentives, the effectiveness of external governance depends on the influence exerted by the community,the media, and the general public over the organization.
In line with the theme ofthis book, for each level, we think in terms of (1) who has power (empowerment),and (2) how these are actors empowered.
Considering how cryptocurrencies arestructured, we distinguish, internally, between the blockchain, the protocol, and theorganizational levels, and externally between the community, media, and sociallevels.
Below we discuss each level of analysis in detail.Governance of blockchain-based organizations  53Internal governanceHere we identify three internal governance forms: owner control at the blockchain level, formal voting at the protocol level, and centralized funding at theorganizational level.The blockchain level.
At the blockchain level, miners (or validators ingeneral), whose behavior is guided by the rules and incentives encoded in thecryptocurrency’s software, constitute the key stakeholder group.
On the onehand, miners/validators work by the software’s rulebook and are incentivizedaccordingly.
In this regard, miners/validators work like “employees” who aregoverned by predetermined incentive mechanisms.
On the other hand, miners/validators have the power to decide which transactions to accept into a block, aswell as to agree or disagree on the “longest chain” that will constitute the trustedversion of the distributed ledger that all users will follow going forward(Nakamoto, 2008).
However, there are different ways to tie transaction validation to cryptocurrency ownership.
For instance, while a proof-of-work (PoW)miner does not have to own the cryptocurrency to mine, on proof-of-stake (PoS)blockchains, validators are incentivized in proportion to the amount of cryptocurrency tokens they hold.
Owner control can thus increase centralization ingovernance by concentrating validation tasks in the hands of a small percentageof wealthy cryptocurrency owners.
Similarly, if a cryptocurrency is “pre-mined”(i.e., a number of tokens are pre-attributed by design to the cryptocurrencyfounders), ownership will be more concentrated.
In addition, some cryptocurrencies allow miners/validators to nominate other network nodes they considermore trustworthy to converge more rapidly to a common decision.
In sum, thereare three governance design features at the blockchain level associated withmore centralization: the use of PoS, the use of pre-mining, and the use ofnomination.The protocol level.
Developers who specialize in programming blockchainapplications constitute the key stakeholder at the protocol level as they are thepeople who “write the rulebook” (Narayanan et al., 2016: 173).
For most cryptocurrencies including Bitcoin, developers work on a voluntary basis and are nothired or funded by any centralized organization.
The code that they work on istypically open source, meaning that any developer can contribute to the codeusing online repositories such as Github.com (which acts as the Wikipedia ofsoftware development).
Still, a small group of very dedicated “core” developerscan be formed and governance decisions may thus become more centralized.However, major changes to the underlying code can be contested by the widercommunity of miners/validators or users, who can voice divergent views ononline forums or at conferences.
Some cryptocurrency organizations formalizethis process by requiring formal voting by the miners/validators before developers can roll out code changes across the network in the form of software updates.For example, Bitcoin requires voting backed by miners’ computing power onBitcoin Improvement Proposals, or BIPs, before they get implemented.
Acryptocurrency with a formal voting procedure in place is considered more54  Y.-Y.
Hsieh et al.decentralized in terms of the governance of its protocol, since developers arethen unable to unilaterally impose code changes to the rest of the organizationalstakeholders.The organizational level.
In theory, the formative ideology behind Bitcoinand many subsequent cryptocurrencies is rooted in the ideas of decentralizedcontrol over token distribution, network participation, and openness.
However,there are still substantial differences in how cryptocurrencies are governed inpractice.
For example, unlike Bitcoin, Ripple has its network and tokens centrally managed by the Ripple company, a venture capital-backed start-up withoffices based in five locations: San Francisco (headquarters), New York, London,Luxembourg, and Sydney.
While the Ripple blockchain is decentralized acrossapproved nodes, like any other centralized company, it has top managers whomake decisions on resource allocation and control the direction for code development.
Developers are hired as formal employees; “trusted nodes” are selectedinto the network based on approval, along with other business functions such asproduct design, marketing, and business development.
Under this more centralized model, management strategies not only are prevalent but necessary for thecryptocurrency-as-company to attract external funding and grow.
The presenceof such centralized funding reflects a more centralized form of governance.External governanceExternal governance mechanisms influence organizations less through formalmechanisms such as control over decision rights or ownership rights, thanthrough informal social mechanisms such as social evaluations, reputationeffects, informal voting, or public image (Aguilera et al., 2015; Dyck and Zingales, 2002; Walsh and Seward, 1990).
Often times, external mechanisms aretriggered by failures in internal organizational governance (Walsh and Seward,1990).
However, as noted, for most cryptocurrencies, the stakeholder structure isvery different from that of traditional organizations.
For example, there are noCEOs or top management teams to be held accountable for the decline of performance, hence the absence of external market for corporate control and potentially weaker reputation effects (Walsh and Seward, 1990; Dyck and Zingales,2002).
In addition, at the center of the organization is the self-validating blockchain, which defines the internal governance rules.
Arguably there is very littleroom for external forces to exert formal and direct influence over the blockchain,even through developers and miners.
Further, external actors attempting to makealterations to technical features can create controversy.
Does informal and indirect governance by external stakeholders such as media or the general publicmatter to investors in the same way as for traditional corporations? The Bitcoinblockchain scalability debate provides an interesting illustration.
Whereas manyusers and developers in the community believe there is a clear need to expandthe current limit of the Bitcoin block size (1MB) to accommodate the growingnumber of transactions by allowing for more transactions per block, makingchanges to the block size appears to be implausible to others.
For example, manyGovernance of blockchain-based organizations  55community enthusiasts firmly believe in the preservation of Bitcoin’s core valuerooted in the ideology of immutability and decentralization, even if it meansBitcoin will not scale as rapidly.
As a result, the debate has been inconclusivesince 2015 as of the time of writing (March 2017).
In the following, we identifythree specific external governance forms: community governance at the community level, negative publicity at the media level, and public interest at thesocial level.Community level.
Many cryptocurrencies were created from the open-sourceBitcoin software code, and follow the same open-source development model.Like many open-source software projects, initial participation is usually drivenby the need for software-related improvements, but later evolves with developers becoming hobbyists (O’Mahony, 2007; Shah, 2006).
However, comparedwith open-source software communities, cryptocurrency communities generallyconsist of a much more diverse base of stakeholders, including: developers,miners, start-ups, enthusiasts, and users.
Community governance involves forumdiscussions and sometimes informal online voting over decisions.
The most usedforums for cryptocurrency discussions include cryptocurrencies’ official forums,specific cryptocurrency sub-groups within forums such as bitcointalk.org,Reddit.com, and social media such as Facebook and Twitter.
Not unlike internalstakeholders, community members self-select into the roles driven by needs,beliefs in the ideologies or technologies, and business opportunities.
These external stakeholders take on an “active and possibly democratic role in the management and operation of the organization” (Van Valkenburgh et al., 2015; Dietz etal., no date).
It is reasonable then to expect a greater level of participation (asobserved in the online forums) to be associated with a more decentralized governance of cryptocurrency organizations by the digital community.Media level.
Recent developments in the corporate governance literature havetreated media as an important source of external governance (Aguilera et al.,2015; Bednar et al., 2013; Dyck et al., 2008).
Different from controlling throughownership and decision rights, the media can influence key stakeholders of anorganization by serving as an information intermediary that plays a governancerole through informing, monitoring, and reputation effects (Bushee et al., 2010;Dyck and Zingales, 2002).
In particular, scholars have demonstrated that negative publicity conveyed in the media is especially effective in influencing organizations.
Durand and Vergne (2015), for instance, show that negative publicitytargeting weapons manufacturers is associated with a higher probability of assetdivestment.
Since the early days of the cryptocurrency industry, when Bitcointransactions were often associated with illegal exchanges on the Dark Web(Campbell-Verduyn and Goguen, this volume), there has been a lot of negativemedia coverage around blockchain-based organizations on issues related to fraudand various hacking scandals.
While many expect that such negative attentionshould scare away investors and negatively affect returns, prior research failed tofind a significant association between the two (Wang and Vergne, 2017).Social level.
The third source of external corporate governance mechanism isrooted in public interest from the broader society.
Public interest pertains to56  Y.-Y.
Hsieh et al.aggregated search activities motivated by curiosity, attempts to learn or understand the technology, and cryptocurrency-related affairs.
Arguably, cryptocurrencies that receive greater public interest are also subject to moredecentralized monitoring and scrutiny regardless of the nature of search and intention.
Similar to the way market stakeholders (i.e., suppliers, customers, and shareholders) can exert pressure to corporate decision-making (Stevens et al., 2005), forcryptocurrencies, social pressure comes from a broader range of external stakeholder groups such as merchants, regulators, and service providers.
Therefore,public interest captures the aggregate external governance at the social level.MethodologyTo shed light on how internal and external governance affects cryptocurrencyreturns, in this study we focus on decentralization as the key dimension by whichorganizational governance forms vary.
As the ideology that underpins the verynotion of cryptocurrency, decentralization represents a continuum along whichone can effectively distinguish between various forms of internal governance.
Atone end of the spectrum, one finds cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, Litecoin,and Peercoin, which strive to retain the self-organized transaction system allowing for pseudonymity, decentralization, and disintermediation (Nakamoto, 2008).At the other end of the spectrum, one finds the less decentralized cryptocurrencyorganizations such as Ripple, built on a blockchain that is permissioned andwherein the nodes are known, trusted participants (e.g., financial institutions andorganizations in the remittances industry).
Following the method and analysisproposed by Wang and Vergne (2017), we sampled five cryptocurrencies corresponding to five different waves of blockchain innovation, and to variousdegrees of decentralization, in order to capture variance across several attributesof their external and internal governance.SamplingWe collected data on Bitcoin (BTC), Litecoin (LTC), Peercoin (PPC), Ripple(XRP), and Stellar (XLM).
These cryptocurrencies vary in terms of their technology, applications, and most importantly, degree of decentralization.
Bitcoinis included in our sample because it represents the first and most establishedcryptocurrency.
At the organizational level, Bitcoin is not centrally funded,and its core developers are not employed by the Bitcoin Foundation or othercentralized entities associated with Bitcoin.
Building on proof-of-work (PoW)consensus mechanism, Bitcoin distributes governance among miners whoallocate external resource to mining (Narayanan et al., 2016: ch7.3).
At theprotocol level, miners can also have influence over code changes throughformal voting mechanisms such as the Bitcoin Improvement Proposals (BIPs),wherein proposals for code improvement are being reviewed, published, andvoted for (or against) by miners (for more details, see https://github.com/bitcoin/bips).Governance of blockchain-based organizations  57Since Bitcoin’s creation in 2009, new cryptocurrencies have been created toembrace new ideas, such as faster transaction verification using Scrypt hashingalgorithm (e.g., Litecoin).
Introduced in 2011, Litecoin was built on the Bitcoinsource code as a proof-of-work cryptocurrency but using a different hashingalgorithm.
It was created as “a lite version of Bitcoin,” which improves the transaction processing speed and security (Lee, 2011).
In contrast to Bitcoin, theidentity of the Litecoin founder, Charles Lee, is known.
Also, a small amount(150 units) of Litecoin was pre-mined.We also included Peercoin because of its ability to achieve greater energyefficiency by incorporating a proof-of-stake (PoS) consensus mechanism.
Incontrast to PoW mining, PoS validators’ voting power is in proportion to theamount of cryptocurrency one holds.
Founded in 2012, Peercoin combines bothPoW and PoS, and grants more decision-making power and control to currentowners of the cryptocurrency.Since 2013, blockchain-based implementations extended beyond strictlydecentralized participation.
For instance, centrally funded blockchain organizations emerged as a solution for the financial industry.
Some are permissioned,such as Ripple (founded in 2013), whose membership is set by a central authority.
Ripple took on a distinct governance approach not only for the cryptographicconsensus, but also regarding how participants need to be approved beforejoining the network.
As noted above, Ripple is funded and managed by a centralized, for-profit organization called Ripple Labs.
All Ripple coins (the cryptocurrency tokens) were pre-mined at founding.Finally, we chose to include Stellar (founded in 2014), which incorporatesfurther improvements on Ripple’s model by using the Federated ByzantineAgreement (FBA) to make participation open, while ensuring that the cryptocurrency is adoptable by financial institutions for instantaneous processing of transactions (Mazières, 2016).
Similar to Ripple, Stellar is not minable, that is, mostof it was pre-mined before launch.
Despite being permission-less, Stellar is alsocentrally funded by a non-profit foundation to facilitate certain social objectivessuch as open financial accessibility and financial inclusion.
Figure 3.1 summarizes where each cryptocurrency in our sample is located on the decentralizationspectrum.DataWe acquired panel data from CoinGecko.com, a leading scholarly project thatcollects daily and weekly data at both the market and community level (Wangand Vergne, 2017; Ong et al., 2015).
CoinGecko.com is an independent datasource compiled by two cryptocurrency academic researchers, Bobby Ong andTeik Ming Lee, at Singapore Management University’s Sim Kee Boon Institute for Financial Economics.
The CoinGecko database consists of informationextracted and scraped from cryptocurrency specialist websites (such as Coinmarketcap.com), code repositories (e.g., Github.com), community forums(such as Reddit.com), social media (e.g., Twitter and Facebook), and search58  Y.-Y.
Hsieh et al.engines (e.g., Bing or Alexa).
In addition to information on price, volume, andmarket capitalization, CoinGecko.com also contains indexes measuringliquidity, protocol development, community activities, and public interestsusing composite scores.
This database has been drawn upon in other scholarlyanalyses, including the book chapter co-authored by the two founders, “Evaluating the potential of alternative cryptocurrencies” (Ong et al., 2015) in TheHandbook of Digital Currency (Lee, 2015).We complemented CoinGecko data with weekly data from Factiva for mediacoverage, and manually coded several governance indicators such as the association with fraud, hacks, and Ponzi schemes.
We did not make a distinctionbetween the financial and the generalist media.
Instead, we focused on mainstream media that follows closely the blockchain industry, such as the FinancialTimes, the Wall Street Journal, and The Economist as they are generally moreobjective and neutral in commenting on the disruptive nature of cryptocurrenciesand blockchains than pro-industry sources, who tend to act as cheerleaders.Observation periodWe study the five cryptocurrencies on a weekly basis between September 2014and August 2015 (when we first began to collect the data).
This is a periodwhen the cryptocurrency market has become more established and stabilizedin contrast to the earlier period in which only a handful of cryptocurrenciesexisted.
More variations in cryptocurrencies were present in this period, withDecentralized CentralizedPermission-less blockchain Permissioned blockchainBitcoin Litecoin Stellar Ripple PeercoinFigure 3.1  Variation of the five cryptocurrencies in our sample along the decentralizationspectrum.Source for graphs of permission-less vs.
permissioned blockchains: www.linkedin.com/pulse/making-blockchain-safe-government-merged-mining-chains-tori-adams.Governance of blockchain-based organizations  59the introduction of Stellar at the start of our observation period.
All cryptocurrencies in our sample existed throughout the period, forming a balanced paneldata for analysis.
The final dataset contains weekly data for 255 observations.MeasuresDependent variable: weekly returnsSupply and demand (by investors) determine cryptocurrency value (Narayananet al., 2016).
Financial returns are a common measure used to evaluate the performance of organizational governance.
For example, stock returns have beenused to measure the performance of internal (Ittner et al., 2003) and externalgovernance (Daines et al., 2010).
We model returns using multivariate linearregression, where returns are a linear combination of various governance-relatedvariables.
In particular, we identified factors pertaining to multiple levels ofinternal and external governance that may directly or indirectly drive investmentdecisions.
For example, whereas cryptocurrencies governed by highly decentralized blockchains may be more attractive as an investment target because of thevalue propositions rooted in security of the network and transactions, a centrallyfunded blockchain organization can be more appealing to investors who believein managerial strategic planning.Following Wang and Vergne (2017), we measured weekly returns as[Pricet+1 –Pricet]/Pricet, whereby price is the cryptocurrency’s weekly averageprice weighted by trading volume.
We build on Wang and Vergne’s (2017)sample statistics, which indicate that the distribution for returns is close tonormal.Independent variablesInternal governance.
As previously explained, we coded three internal governance variables at three different levels: owner control, formal voting, and centralized funding at the blockchain, the protocol, and organizational levels,respectively.
We measured owner control using three binary indicators: “PoS,”“nomination,” and “pre-mined.” We first studied in detail the white papers ofthe cryptocurrencies in our sample and identified blockchain design elementsthat are related to governance.
“PoS” was coded as a 1 if the consensus mechanism contains proof-of-stake and 0 otherwise.
We assigned the value 1 (and 0otherwise) to “nomination” if the cryptocurrency allows the network participants to select a subset of nodes as trusted validators.
Finally, we coded “premined” as 1 if the cryptocurrency allocated a certain amount of coins to thecore developers or their closed loop before launch and 0 otherwise.
We thenadded up scores of these three indicators and assigned the sums as scores forowner control.
This aggregated score thus takes on higher values when cryptocurrency accumulation by owners is associated with more centralized controlover the cryptocurrency.60  Y.-Y.
Hsieh et al.We measured formal voting by coding the presence of formal procedures forminers to vote on protocol changes, using a binary variable.
We coded 1 for thepresence of formal voting, which indicates a democratic governance mechanismat the protocol level, and 0 for the absence of such a mechanism.We measured centralized funding as a binary variable by assigning 1 to thecryptocurrency if it is centrally funded by an organization and 0 if otherwise.
Forexample, the Bitcoin Core projects (and the core developers) are funded througha “Sponsorship Program” by several organizations such as the MIT Media Lab,and start-ups such as Blockstream, Chaincode Labs, and BTCC (van Wirdum,2016).
Therefore, Bitcoin is coded 0 for centralized funding.
Conversely, Stellarhave their platforms and developers funded centrally by the Stellar Foundation.Stellar tokens are centrally allocated toward salaries, Stellar grants for participants in the direct sign-up program, and other strategic planning.
Therefore,Stellar was assigned a score of 1 for centralized funding.External governance.
We capture external governance of blockchain organizations by looking at community governance, negative publicity, and public interestusing data from social media, traditional news media, and search engines, respectively.
For social media, we adopted the composite score, “community governance,” developed by CoinGecko to capture the degree of community participationin social media forum discussions.
CoinGecko weighted indicators for eachcryptocurrency consisting of: the number of Reddit subscribers, the number ofReddit active users, the number of Reddit new posts in 48 hours, the number ofReddit new comments in new posts in 48 hours, the number of Facebook likes,and the number of Twitter followers.
Because of our non-disclosure agreementwith CoinGecko, we are unable to reveal the exact weightings for each indicator.For news media, we adopted the measure negative publicity developed inWang and Vergne (2017).
The authors counted the weekly number of negativenews articles using content analysis by keywords associated misconducts such ascriminal or underground activities with the name of the cryptocurrency.
Aresearch assistant was hired to search in Factiva by keywords such as [“Bitcoin”AND (“fraud*” OR “hacked” OR “Ponzi” OR “theft”)] or [“ripple” near7(“bitcoin” OR “crypto*” OR “altcoin)] AND (“fraud*” OR “hacked” OR“Pomzi” OR “scam” OR “theft”).
The results for coding were randomly crossverified and validated by one of the authors.
The final numbers of article countsplus one were logged for the regression model estimation.Finally, we measure public interest from search engine data using the indicatordeveloped by CoinGecko.
It is a composite measure consisting of a weightedaverage of the number of web search results for each specific cryptocurrency onBing and the Alexa web traffic ranking for the cryptocurrency website.
Thismeasure captures the interest that the public pays to particular cryptocurrencies,whether it is for general inquiries, searches for specific information, or technicaldetails.
Conceptualized as “buzz” around a cryptocurrency (Wang and Vergne,2017), public interest serves as an indicator for external governance which influences investors’ decisions.
CoinGecko computes the public interest variable bynormalizing the raw value against the Bitcoin value as a benchmark.Governance of blockchain-based organizations  61Control variablesWe control for cryptocurrencies’ supply growth, liquidity, and technologicaldevelopment for the analysis.
Although the coin supply growth rate based on thespeed of new block generation time is usually predefined in the protocol, variation exists when there is a surge or rapid decline in network activities, such asmining power for PoW cryptocurrencies.
New coins can also be distributedunexpectedly to the network in the case of non-minable cryptocurrencies such asRipple and Stellar.
Despite the fact that coin issuance self-adjusts to account fornetwork changes, temporary deviation in supply from the targeted average is stillpresent, affecting returns in the short term.
Therefore, we control for supplygrowth computed as (Supplyt+1 –Supplyt)/Supplyt.We also control for liquidity using the CoinGecko liquidity score obtainedfrom major cryptocurrency exchanges such as Bitfinex and Okcoin.
Finally, wecontrol for technological development to capture the innovation potential enabledby cryptocurrencies’ underlying software.
Our previous research indicates thatthe extent to which the code base is maintained and the level of collaboratedproblem-solving by developers is positively and significantly related to returns(Wang and Vergne, 2017).
We adopted the technological development measuredeveloped by CoinGecko, which weighted the number of unique code collaborators, the number of proposals merged in the code repository, the number ofissues raised and fixed, and the number of forks as indicators.
We are unable toreveal the exact weightings for the composite measure because of a confidentiality agreement with CoinGecko.
We lagged all external governance predictorsexcept liquidity as in Wang and Vergne (2017) to avoid the problems of contemporaneous feedback from return to community, media, and other internetactivities.A detailed list of variables and their definitions are presented in Table 3.1.AnalysesWe conducted three model estimations.
Model 1 contains only the control variables, Model 2 includes the external governance variables, and Model 3 is thefull model with both internal and external governance variables.
FollowingWang and Vergne (2017), we used fixed effect (FE) estimations for Model 1 andModel 2 to account for unobserved individual group-level heterogeneity.However, for Model 3, FE are inappropriate since internal governance variablessuch as owner control, formal voting, and centralized funding are coded ascryptocurrency-level time-invariant variables (they would be dropped from theFE estimates).
Random effect estimation, on the other hand, can yield unbiased,consistent, and efficient estimation on the condition that group-level variablesare independent of the regressors.
We conducted a Hausman test, which failed toreject the null hypothesis.
Therefore, we ran random effect estimations forModel 3.Table 3.1 List of variablesVariable Level DefinitionDependent variableReturnsOrganization Weekly weighted returns of the cryptocurrency[Pricet+1 –Pricet]/PricetInternal governanceOwner controlBlockchain The sum of three binary variables below:PoS: 1 if the blockchain consensus is proof-of-stake, else 0.Pre-mined: 1 if all or part of the cryptocurrency was issued to core developers or their closedloops before launch, else 0.Nomination: 1 if participants have the power to nominate their trusted nodes, else 0.
Formal voting Protocol 1 if there exist formal voting mechanisms (e.g., BIPS) for miners to vote for protocol change,else 0.Centralized funding Organization 1 if the cryptocurrency core development activities and core developers are centrally fundeddirectly by a firm or foundation, else 0.External governanceCommunity governance (t–1)Community A composite score consisting of social media data: the number of Reddit subscribers, thenumber of Reddit active users, the number of Reddit new posts in 48 hours, the number ofReddit new comments in new posts in 48 hours, the number of Facebook likes, and thenumber of Twitter followers.Negative publicity (t–1) Social Log (the number of negative media news articles in the previous period).Public interest (t–1) Social A composite score consisting of the weighted average of web searches on Bing, and theAlexia web traffic ranking of the cryptocurrency’s website in the previous period.Control variablesSupply growth since t –1 [Supplyt+1 –Supplyt]/SupplytLiquidity Liquidity measured and supplied by CoinGecko.Technological development(t –1)A composite score including: the number of unique code collaborators, the number ofproposals merged in the code repository, the number of issues raised and fixed, and thenumber of forks in the previous period.Governance of blockchain-based organizations  63ResultsTable 3.2 displays the regression results.
Model 1 includes control variables, cryptocurrency fixed effects, and the time trend.
Model 2 adds the external governancevariables, and Model 3 the internal governance variables.
All models are estimatedusing Huber-White standard errors which are robust to heteroscedasticity.Interpretation of the findingsInternal governance.
Model 3 indicates that owner control at the blockchainlevel has a negative and significant (p<0.001) effect on returns.
For a onestandard deviation increase in owner control (0.6330), returns decrease by 19Table 3.2 Regression resultsModel 1 (FE) Model 2 (FE) Model 3 (RE)External governance effectsPublic interest (t–1) –5.85*** –5.49***(1.543) (1.110)Negative publicity (t–1) 0.052 0.057(0.066) (0.072)Community governance (t–1) –3.88 –3.15**(3.401) (1.506)Internal governance design choicesOwner control –0.30***(0.053)Formal voting –0.16***(0.021)Centralized funding 0.10***(0.030)Control variablesLiquidity 2.12*** 2.34*** 2.41***(0.564) (0.617) (0.667)Supply growth since (t–1) 0.87* 0.21*** 0.20***(0.046) (0.072) (0.072)Technological development (t–1) 1.40*** 2.60*** 2.53***(0.296) (0.616) (0.523)Cryptocurrency fixed effects included included n/aWeekly trend –0.000228 –0.00144 –0.00139(0.0007) (0.001) (0.0009)Constant –0.52*** 0.20 0.40*(0.088) (0.526) (0.263)N 250 250 250Within- or adjusted R2 0.060 0.109 0.108Notes1 All models instrument liquidity (not lagged) using all regressors.* p<0.10;** p<0.05;*** p<0.01.64  Y.-Y.
Hsieh et al.percent (i.e., 0.6330×(–0.30)=(–0.190)).
In other words, blockchain-level routines governed in a more centralized form yield lower returns.
If decentralizationis precisely what investors value in blockchain organizations, they should indeedevaluate more highly the more decentralized blockchains.Surprisingly, though, at the protocol level, the existence of decentralizedformal voting mechanisms is negatively and significantly (p<0.001) related toreturns.
When formal voting increases by one standard deviation (0.49029),returns drops by 7.8 percent (i.e., 0.49029×(–0.16)=(–0.078)).
It could be thatinvestors perceive decentralization at the protocol level as a source of governance inefficiency.
Indeed, voting on protocol changes is time-consuming anddoes not allow for quick decision-making, as illustrated by the lingering debatesin the Bitcoin community around increasing block size.Finally, at the organizational level, centralized funding is positively and significantly (p<0.001) associated with returns as shown in Model 3.
For a onestandard deviation increase in centralized funding (0.4903), returns increase by4.9 percent (0.4903×0.10=0.049).
A centrally funded blockchain-based organization may appeal more to investors by demonstrating clear strategic directionsand organizational mandates which lead to better efficiency and returns.
Overall,our findings reveal that more decentralization adds value for investors only at thelower (blockchain) level of the governance hierarchy; when it comes to higherlevel protocol changes or the overall strategic direction of the cryptocurrencyorganization, more centralization is preferred.External governance.
Public interest is negatively and significantly (p<0.001)associated with returns.
In other words, the “buzz effect” does a disservice toreturns.
According to Model 3, for a one standard deviation (0.02146) increasein public interest, returns drop by 11.8 percent (i.e., 0.02146×(–5.49)=–0.118;see Wang and Vergne, 2017, for a discussion).
Furthermore, negative publicity is not significantly associated with returns.
As such, unlike in prior studiesof the media as agents of external corporate governance (e.g., Dyck et al.,2008), here we do not find that negative media coverage decreases returns.This could be explained by the fact that most cryptocurrencies do not have acentral authority to which blame can be attributed, such as a top managementteam.
In turn, the absence of a central authority could make negative publicitya lot less effective than in the context of traditional corporations.
Finally,community governance is negatively and significantly (p < 0.05) associatedwith returns.
For a one standard deviation increase in community governance(0.58625), returns decrease by 18.5 percent (i.e., 0.05862 × (–3.15) = (–0.185)).We do not find increased community governance to be beneficial for themarket returns of blockchain-based organizations.
This could be becausecommunity involvement becomes more intense in periods of intense criticism(that is not captured by negative publicity), as was the case around the time ofthe attack against the decentralized, Ethereum-powered investment vehiclecalled “The DAO” (Breitman, 2017; DuPont, this volume).
To explore furtherthe relationship between community governance and cryptocurrency returns,future studies should not only capture the centralization and intensity ofGovernance of blockchain-based organizations  65community governance, as we do here, but also the overall sentiment (positiveor negative) of the community.ConclusionOur findings point to interesting effects of governance on returns.
Internally,while centralized governance design choices at the blockchain level decreasereturns, centralized governance design choices at the protocol and the organizational levels appear to be more beneficial for returns.
The results correspondto the idea that, on the one hand, investors value cryptocurrencies’ core valueproposition, rooted in decentralization; but on the other hand, they are suspicious of decentralized governance at higher levels in the organization becausethey could slow down strategic decision-making (e.g., regarding the introduction of new innovations) or create information asymmetries between investorsand technologists.Since March 2017, the cryptocurrency market has become increasingly competitive – Bitcoin’s market dominance is reduced significantly, indicating thegrowth of a more diverse range of blockchain-based governance models, whichentail additional complexity relative to traditional corporate governance.
Thesenew forms of governance, which place computer code at the center of thesystem, emphasize the need for new research on organizational governanceaccounting for the interdependence of various levels within blockchain-basedorganizations (i.e., the blockchain, protocol, and organizational levels).
Thisstudy paves the way for crafting new theories about the governance with, andby, “decentralized autonomous organizations” (DuPont, this volume) such ascryptocurrencies.In terms of global governance, these new and open blockchain organizationsembody more inclusive solutions to governance problems that could alter thebalance of power between incumbent firms and start-ups.
As noted at the beginning of the chapter, blockchain technology has attracted considerable attentionfrom central banks and multinational retail banks.
Today, many of these financial institutions turn to financial technology start-ups (e.g., Ripple) to leverageblockchain technology.
Foreseeably, this collaboration between centralized financial institutions and decentralized blockchain organizations will also foster theemergence of hybrid governance forms across organizational boundaries, as waspreviously observed in the context of open-source software communities(O’Mahony, 2007; Shah, 2006).
It is therefore urgent for scholars in the socialsciences to address the rise of blockchain with solid empirical research and freshtheory on these new forms of organization.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by a Social Sciences and Humanities Research Councilof Canada (SSHRC) grant (no.
430-2015-0670); by the Ontario Government’sEarly Researcher Award (no.
R4905A06); and by the Scotiabank Digital66  Y.-Y.
Hsieh et al.Banking Lab at Ivey Business School.
The funders had no role in study design,analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.BibliographyAguilera, R.V., Filatotchev, I., Gospel, H., and Jackson, G.
(2008).
An organizationalapproach to comparative corporate governance: Costs, contingencies, and complementarities.
Organization Science, 19(3): 475–92.Aguilera, R.V., and Jackson, G.
(2010).
Comparative and international corporate governance.
Academy of Management Annals, 4(1): 485–556.Aguilera, R.V., Desender, K., Bednar, M.K., and Lee, J.
(2015).
Connecting the dots:Bringing external corporate governance into the corporate governance puzzle.
Academyof Management Annals, 9(1): 483–573.Atzori, M.
(2017).
Blockchain technology and decentralized governance: Is the state stillnecessary? Journal of Governance and Regulation, 6(1): 45–62.Bednar, M.K., Boivie, S., and Prince, N.R.
(2013).
Burr under the saddle: How mediacoverage influences strategic change.
Organization Science, 24(3): 910–25.Breitman, K.
(2017).
Op ed: Why Ethereum’s hard fork will cause problems in thecoming year.
Bitcoin Magazine.
Retrieved March 30, 2017, from https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/op-ed-why-ethereums-hard-fork-will-cause-problems-coming-year/Bushee, B J., Core, J.E., Guay, W., and Hamm, S.J.W.
(2010).
The role of the businesspress as an information intermediary.
Journal of Accounting Research, 48(1):1–19.Buterin, V.
(2014).
Ethereum Blog.
Retrieved February 21, 2017, from https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/05/06/daos-dacs-das-and-more-an-incomplete-terminology-guide/Connelly, B.L., Hoskisson, R.E., Tihanyi, L., and Certo, S.T.
(2010).
Ownership as aform of corporate governance.
Journal of Management Studies, 47(8):1561–89.Daines, R.M., Gow, I.D., and Larcker, D.F.
(2010).
Rating the ratings: How good arecommercial governance ratings? Journal of Financial Economics, 98(3): 439–61.Dalton, D.R., Hitt, M.A., Certo, S.T., and Dalton, C.M.
(2007).
1 The fundamentalagency problem and its mitigation: Independence, equity, and the market for corporatecontrol.
Academy of Management Annals, 1(1): 1–64.Davidson, S., De Filippi, P., and Potts, J.
(2016a).
Disrupting governance: The new institutional economics of distributed ledger technology.
SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2811995Davidson, S., De Filippi, P., and Potts, J.
(2016b).
Economics of blockchain.
SSRN:http://ssrn.com/abstract=2744751 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2744751Del Castillo, M.
(2017).
Decentralizing central banks: How R3 envisions the future offiat.
Coindesk.
Retrieved April 5, 2017, from www.coindesk.com/decentralizatingcentral-banks-how-r3-envisions-the-future-of-fiat/Dietz, J., Xethalis, G., De Filippi, P., and Hazard, J.
(no date) Model distributed collaborative organizations.
Stanford Working Group.
Retrieved August 21, 2017, from https://fair.coop/?get_group_doc=50/1430309418-SWARMSTANFORDModelDCOTemplate.pdfDurand, R., and Vergne, J.P.
(2015).
Asset divestment as a response to media attacks instigmatized industries.
Strategic Management Journal, 36(8): 1205–23.Dyck, A., and Zingales, L.
(2002).
The corporate governance role of the media.
Unpublished working paper.
Harvard University.Dyck, A., Volchkova, N., and Zingales, L.
(2008).
The corporate governance role of themedia: Evidence from Russia.
Journal of Finance, 63(3): 1093–1135.Governance of blockchain-based organizations  67Fama, E.F., and Jensen, M.C.
(1983).
Separation of ownership and control.
Journal ofLaw and Economics, 26(2): 301–25.Hambrick, D.C., Werder, A.V., and Zajac, E.J.
(2008).
New directions in corporate governance research.
Organization Science, 19(3): 381–85.Hileman, G., and Rauchs, M.
(2017).
Global cryptocurrency benchmarking study.Research by Cambridge Centre of Alternative Finance.Ittner, C.D., Lambert, R.A., and Larcker, D.F.
(2003).
The structure and performanceconsequences of equity grants to employees of new economy firms.
Journal ofAccounting and Economics, 34(1): 89–127.Jensen, M.C., and Meckling, W.H.
(1976).
Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior,agency costs and ownership structure.
Journal of Financial Economics, 3(4): 305–60.Lee, C.
(2011).
Bitcointalk.
Retrieved February 23, 2017, from https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=47417.0Lee, D.K.C.
(2015).
Handbook of digital currency.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.MacDonald, T.J., Allen, D.W.E., and Potts, J.
(2016).
Blockchains and the boundaries ofself-organized economies: Predictions for the future of banking.
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2749514.Mazières, D.
(2016).
The Stellar consensus protocol: A federated model for internet-levelconsensus.
Stellar White Paper.
Retrieved August 21, 2017, from www.stellar.org/papers/stellar-consensus-protocol.pdfMoore, J.H., and Kraatz, M.S.
(2011).
Governance form and organizational adaptation:Lessons from the savings and loan industry in the 1980s.
Organization Science, 22(4):850–68.Nakamoto, S.
(2008).
Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system.
Retrieved August21, 2017, from https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdfNarayanan, A., Bonneau, J., Felten, E., Miller, A., and Goldfeder, S.
(2016).
Bitcoin andcryptocurrency technologies: A comprehensive introduction.
Princeton, NJ: PrincetonUniversity Press.O’Mahony, S.
(2007).
The governance of open source initiatives: What does it mean tobe community managed? Journal of Management and Governance, 11: 139–50.Ong, B., Lee, T.M., Li, B., and Lee, D.K.C.
(2015).
Evaluating the potential of alternativecryptocurrencies.
In D.K.C.
Lee (ed.) Handbook of digital currency (pp.
81–135).Amsterdam: Elsevier.Scott, W.R., and Davis, G.F.
(2007).
Organizations and organizing: Rational, natural,and open systems perspectives.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.Shah, S.K.
(2006).
Motivation, governance, and the viability of hybrid forms in opensource software development.
Management Science, 52(7): 1000–14.Stevens, J.M., Steensma, K.H., Harrison, D.A., and Cochran, P.L.
(2005).
Symbolic orsubstantive document? The influence of ethics codes on financial executives’ decisions.Strategic Management Journal, 26(2): 181–95.Van Valkenburgh, P., Dietz, J., De Filippi, P., Shadab, H., Xethalis, G., and Bollier, D.(2015).
Distributed collaborative organisations: Distributed networks and regulatoryframeworks.
Harvard Working Paper.Van Wirdum, A.
(2016).
Who funds Bitcoin core development? How the industry supports Bitcoin’s ‘reference client’.
Bitcoin Magazine.
Retrieved August 21, 2017, fromhttps://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/who-funds-bitcoin-core-development-how-theindustry-supports-bitcoin-s-reference-client-1459967859/Walsh, J., and Seward, J.
(1990).
On the efficiency of internal and external corporatecontrol mechanisms.
Academy of Management Review, 15(3): 421–58.68  Y.-Y.
Hsieh et al.Wang, S., and Vergne, J-P.
(2017).
Buzz factor or innovation potential: What explainscryptocurrencies’ returns? PLoS One, 12(1): e0169556.
http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0169556Williamson, O.E.
(1996).
The mechanisms of governance.
New York: Oxford UniversityPress.Wright, A., and De Filippi, P.
(2015).
Decentralized blockchain technology and the riseof Lex Cryptographia.
SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2580664.Yermack, D.
(2017).
Corporate governance and blockchains.
Review of Finance,p.rfw074.4 The mutual constitution oftechnology and global governanceBitcoin, blockchains, and theinternational anti-money-launderingregimeMalcolm Campbell-Verduyn and Marcel GoguenHow do blockchain applications affect global anti-money-laundering (AML)governance and how does global governance affect the evolution of blockchainapplications? This chapter navigates between technological and social determinism in highlighting the mutually constitutive relationships between blockchainsand global anti-money-laundering governance.
We question both directions of“loss of control” (Shields, 2005b: 497) perspectives that consider global governance as subjected to the predetermined trajectories of technological change aswell as the interactions between key actors operating separately from their widersocio-technical environment.
Drawing on constructivist global political economy(GPE) studies emphasising the roles of technologies in international regimes, aswell as media reports and the budding interdisciplinary literature on blockchains,we stress the unexpected and often underappreciated manners in which evenapplications of novel sets of knowledge impact governance practices that in turnimpact the evolution of emergent technologies.This argument is elaborated in two steps.
First, we reveal how the technicalfeatures of blockchain technologies shape and constrain governance in the international anti-money-laundering regime.
In a second step, we illustrate how theresponses of this regime in turn shape and constrain the evolution of this set ofemergent technologies.
Taken together, these arguments provide a nuancedunderstanding of the mutual constitution of emergent technologies and globalgovernance that can also be understood as ‘dialectical’.
Both terms consider howsocio-technical environments condition the interactions underpinning globalgovernance yet are also influenced by the specific relations of competition, collaboration, and conflict amongst state and non-state actors in internationalregimes.This chapter develops these arguments over three sections.
The first sectionbegins by situating our analysis within GPE literatures on international regimesthat tend to underappreciate the mutually constitutive relationship between technologies and global governance.
The second section empirically illustrates theco-evolution of technology and global governance in the relationships betweenthe international AML regime and blockchain technologies.
We focus on how70 M.
Campbell-Verduyn and M.
Goguenthe specific responses to the money laundering implications of these technologies by a leading actor in this regime, the Financial Action Task Force, are constituted by the technical features of blockchains.
We also illustrate how globalgovernance responses in turn influence the evolution of applications of thisemerging technology in unexpected but important manners.
The concludingsection summarises and points to further considerations for improving understanding of the co-evolution of technologies and governance in the global political economy.International regimes and the socio-technical environment ofglobal governanceGPE as well as International Relations (IR) scholarship understand internationalregimes in varying manners.
Despite overlapping in some respects, their conceptions can generally be grouped in two broadly diverging categories.
On the onehand, rationalist approaches regard international regimes in principle–agentterms as formal rule-based organisations that reflect either the common or theindividual interests of their members, who tend to largely be nation-states.Liberal approaches, for example, stress how international regimes benefitcommon interests, whilst realist approaches understand international regimes asadvancing the particular interests of the most powerful ‘hegemonic’ state(s)(Gilpin, 2011; Keohane, 1983; Krasner, 1983).
On the other hand, constructivistaccounts move beyond rational utility-maximising models in stressing how international regimes influence the perception of actor interests, even those of themost dominant state(s).
Here international regimes are considered not merely asformal organisations but as also consisting of less formalised intersubjectivenorms, conventions, and standards of practice.
The latter can shape state identities, interests, and ultimately international interactions in particular manners(Onuf, 1989; Reus-Smit, 1997; Wendt, 1992).
As Hasenclever, Mayer, and Rittberger (1997: 155) succintly put it, regimes “prescribe certain actions in definedcircumstances, they also serve as commonly used points of reference for thedetermination and the assessment of individual behavior.”Rationalist and constructivist understandings of international regimes overlapin foregrounding the roles of states.
Yet these state-centric analyses tend to overlook relationships between international regimes and non-state actors as well asmaterial applications of knowledge imbued in technologies.
States and regimesinteract less in abstract voids than within particular socio-technical environmentsshaped, yet not wholly determined, by technologies and their applications bynon-state actors.
International interactions at the United Nations or the EuropeanUnion, for example, are enabled and structured by the translation servicesoffered by firms mobilising applications of particular information communication technologies (ICTs).
The specific nature and composition of the sociotechnical environments characterised by state as well as non-state actors andtechnologies influence the character of international regimes and global governance more generally.
This influence can be causally determined by revealingConstitution of technology and global governance 71how specific actors in international regimes perceive technologies as posingimplications “to which changes in the regimes were designed to respond, and ifthey had the ability to bring about these changes” (Porter, 1993: 148).
GPEscholars have for instance revealed how the highly technocratic and depoliticisedinternational regime overseeing financial governance reflects the specific sociotechnical characteristics of global finance itself (Best, 2003; Porter, 2003).The relationships between technologies and non-state actors in the broadersocio-technical environment in which international regimes operate are notmerely one-way or uni-directional.
Rather, technologies and socio-technicalenvironments are themselves also shaped and influenced by internationalregimes.
More specifically, the responses of international regimes to the implications raised by applications of novel technologies in turn influence the development and evolution of technologies and the actors applying them in particularmanners.
Whether technologies are perceived as challenges or as opportunitiesby key actors in international regimes can entail different types of responses.
Atechnology regarded as a threat to a regime may instigate much differentresponses from those regarded as providing opportunities for global governance.In either instance, governance responses are neither wholly determined by thespecific features and applications of technology, nor are they completely sociallydetermined.
Rather, responses to technological change are shaped and constrained by the particular set of state and non-state actors involved, as well astheir perceptions of the specific implications posed by technological changes.Governance responses then tend to shape and constrain the evolution of technologies and their applications by state and non-state actors.
The interactive or ‘dialectical’ relationship between international regimes and technologies can also beunderstood as ‘mutually constitutive’, as Figure 4.1 illustrates in a simplifiedmanner.Blockchains and the international AML regime1This section illustrates the mutual constitution of technology and global governance through an examination of relationships between blockchain technologiesand the international anti-money-laundering (AML) regime.
After a brief overview of what precisely money laundering entails, we proceed to scrutinise thecharacter of the international AML regime and blockchain technologies in turn.The mutual constitution of the former and latter are then elaborated in detailinghow key actors in the international AML regime perceived blockchain-influencedchanges as challenges.
The responses to such challenges are shown to have beenintegrally influenced, yet not wholly determined, by key features of blockchainSocio-technical environment International regimesShape and constrainFigure 4.1 The mutually constitutive relationship between technologies and internationalregimes.72 M.
Campbell-Verduyn and M.
Goguentechnologies.
A final subsection reveals how the responses of key actors in theAML regime in turn shaped and constrained the particular evolution that applications of this emerging technology has undertaken.What exactly is money laundering?Money laundering, simply put, is the ‘mainstreaming’ of proceeds from illicitactivities into the legitimate financial system in ways that conceal their illegitimate origins.
Scholars scrutinising these activities tend to analytically sub-dividemoney laundering into three distinct stages: placement, layering, and integration(Straub, 2001: 518–19; Shields, 2005b: 486).
Placement is the process of takingdirect proceeds of crime and transferring them into less suspicious forms, whichcan then be ‘slipped’ into the financial system.
Layering then involves attemptsto conceal the origins and ownerships of funds in shifting them to and from multiple different institutions in order for their origins to become indecipherable.Finally, integration is the stage when the proceeds of crime are ultimatelymasked as part of the legitimate financial system.Several types of money laundering exist.
These can involve the physicalsmuggling of large quantities of paper money, the siphoning of aid funds, theuse of front businesses, tax evasion, bribery, prepaid cards, insurance claims,international trade, and real estate transactions, as well as ‘non-bank paymentservices providers’ such as PayPal (Levi and Reuter, 2006: 312; Tropina, 2014:74; Unger, 2013: 359; Choo, 2009: 12; Isa et al., 2015: 8; Hett, 2008: 1–6;Zdanowicz, 2004: 54; Stokes, 2012: 222).
Despite this wide array of possibilities, money laundering activities tend to involve specific financial intermediaries (Ping, 2004: 48; Zdanowicz, 2004: 53).
Banks and other financial institutionshave long served as the main trusted third parties between two or more partiesseeking to engage in money laundering.
Because of their central roles withinglobal finance and specifically in international payment and settlement systems,these centralised institutions have been considered the main ‘choke points’(Shields, 2005b: 488) that the AML regime has long targeted and relied upon(Chong and Lopez-de-Silanes, 2015: 79; Isa et al., 2015: 9).The international anti-money-laundering regimeMoney laundering did not originate with the application of blockchain technologies to Bitcoin and other CCs (Bjerg, 2016: 10).
Rather it is a longstanding practice (Chong and Lopez-de-Silanes, 2015: 78) that formally became criminalisedwith the 1986 passage of the Money Laundering Control Act in the United States(Shields, 2005b: 499).
By 2008 over 170 countries had formally criminalised theactivity.Studies by GPE scholars and social scientists from a variety of disciplineshave detailed the origins and expansion of the international AML regime.Rationalist analyses stress how the security interests of the world’s hegemon, theUS, were central to the development of an international regime targeting moneyConstitution of technology and global governance 73launderers initially as part of the ‘war on drugs’ and then later as part of the ‘waron terror’ (Reynolds, 2002; Kingah and Zwartjes, 2015).2 These analysesemphasise the key roles of the US in the creation and expansion of the FinancialAction Task Force (FATF), the Paris-based intergovernmental organisation formally comprising 35 member states and two regional organisations.
Through itsassociate and observer members, as well as members of regional bodies,however, the FATF is linked to nearly every country in the world.3 The FATFissued 40 recommendations following its 1989 founding and a further ninerecommendations after the 11 September 2001 attacks.
Its 40+9 recommendations are widely regarded as central to the international AML regime (Stringer,2011: 110; Isa et al., 2015: 8).
Constructivist accounts of the international AMLregime, meanwhile, tend to stress how the informal and non-legally bindingrecommendations of the FATF have been adopted by a majority of the world’scountries through informal forms of governance.
The use of ‘blacklisting’, forexample, has been regarded as inducing recalcitrant states to comply with AMLrecommendations through forms of peer pressure, both from within the widerinternational community of states, as well from the wider set of banks and financial institutions in seeking to avoid being identified with non-compliant jurisdictions (Wessel, 2006: 174).
Together, rationalist and constructivist accounts haveinsightfully illustrated the key role of hegemonic power in developing the international AML regime, as well as the roles of informal standards and practices incompliance with its key recommendations (Sharman, 2008: 636).Interdisciplinary studies of the international AML regime stress the roles ofkey non-state actors in general and banks in particular.
These centralised institutions are considered crucial for investigating the ‘audit trail’ (Shields, 2005b:492) left behind by international financial transfers.
Banks in particular havebeen tasked to ‘follow the money’ in helping regulators to identify criminalmoney launderers (Levi, 2015: 276).
These non-state actors play key roles in theinternational AML regime by providing access to wire transfer records.
Individual bank employees are effectively deputised as AML enforcers (Shields,2005b: 490; Masciandaro, 2004: 22; Ping, 2004) as they fulfil currency transaction reports (CTRs) for deposits/transactions of $10,000 or more, suspiciousactivity reports (SARs) when there is a ‘reasonable’ basis for suspecting thatmoney laundering might be occurring, and make profiles on clients whosesources of money seem likely to be associated with criminal activities followingknow your customer (KYC) requirements (Boles, 2015: 379; Donahue, 2006:396; Gruber, 2013: 191; Hett, 2008: 3; Shields, 2005b: 489, 2005a: 19).
Thoughusefully recognising the important roles played by non-state actors such asbanks, existing accounts nevertheless tend to overlook or simply assume inpassing the specific technologies banks and regulators rely upon, as well as howthe wider socio-technical environment shapes the international AML regime (e.g.Shields, 2005b: 495; Stokes, 2012: 223).74 M.
Campbell-Verduyn and M.
GoguenBlockchains and international money laundering in theory and inpracticeTwo specific features of blockchain technologies pose novel implications forinternational money laundering: the decentralisation and quasi-anonymity oftransactions on global networks.
This subsection details how these implicationspose theoretical rather than actual challenges for the centralised actors chargedwith identifying suspicious transactions and for the verification of the individualsinvolved in suspicious transactions by the international AML regime.First, by enabling transactions directly between users in decentralised networks spread worldwide, blockchains bypass the trusted third parties such asbanks that have long been central to the international AML regime.
Rather thantrusting traditional centralised institutions such as banks to verify and police theexchange of funds, blockchain transactions rely both on complex algorithms andon decentralised networks of users to continuously verify the validity ofexchanges.4 In other words, cryptocurrencies (CCs) such as Bitcoin and otherblockchain applications enable users to exchange directly between themselveswithout going through traditional trusted third parties.
Since, theoretically atleast, there are no centralised institutions to ‘deputise’ in ensuring that transactions meet international AML requirements, blockchain applications such asCCs “neatly sidestep the plethora of anti-money laundering regulationsdeveloped over the past 25 years” (Stokes, 2013: 3).
American governmentanalyst Andrew Macurak (2014: 3) succinctly summarises this first implicationposed by the technical design of blockchains for the international AML regime:“[w]ith digital exchanges of real currency, financial intermediaries collect a feeto verify that value has actually changed hands […] Bitcoin makes files changehands like physical cash”.The second technical feature of blockchains posing implications for the international AML regime is the quasi-anonymity provided to users.
The tensionbetween the desire for transparency and anonymity is a central issue confrontingdigital technologies more widely (DeNardis, 2014: 57–9) that plays out in particular ways with blockchain applications.
Identifying real-world individualsbased on user addresses is rendered difficult – but not impossible5 – by the complexity of cryptographic methods underpinning blockchains (Kostakis andGiotitsas, 2014: 31).
The central implication for the international AML regime isthat, as Deloitte principal Fred Curry states, regulators “can’t monitor transactions if [they] don’t know who the parties are” (cited in Rubenfeld, 2015).
Foremployees of financial institutions whose job it is to recognise “evasive or defensive answers to questions”, it becomes difficult to identify whom exactly toquestion (Stokes, 2013).
A related implication is for financiers and regulatorsalike to develop an understanding of what ‘atypical’ and what ‘normal’ blockchain transactions are.
As the legal scholar Robert Stokes (2013) puts it, this isthe issue of knowing exactly “what a suspicious BTC [Bitcoin] transfer would‘look’ like”.
Put differently, how can suspicious blockchain-based transactionsbe identified without any standard reference of their typical use?Constitution of technology and global governance 75Together, the decentralised and quasi-anonymous features of blockchainspresent important implications for the international AML regime.
Blockchainbased transactions in applications such as CCs do not rely on centralised banksand financial institutions as ‘choke points’ to undertake exchange.
Meanwhile,the ability to identify the parties involved in blockchain-based transactions issignificantly diminished.
The most prominent real-world example of the moneylaundering potential of blockchain technology was the online exchange SilkRoad, which exclusively accepted Bitcoin in its ‘dark net’ market for illicitgoods and services and whose alleged creator was sentenced to life in prison formoney laundering and other charges.6 Some research has identified a correlationbetween interests in CCs and illegal activity, more generally, by analysingAmerican search engine data (Yelowitz and Wilson, 2015).
Yet beyond this,little evidence has directly linked blockchain applications to actual money laundering operations.
The 2015 British National Risk Assessment concluded that“[t]here are a limited number of case studies upon which any solid conclusionscould be drawn that digital currencies are used for money laundering” and that“[t]he money laundering risk associated with digital currencies is low” (HerMajesty’s Treasury and Home Office, 2015).
Despite sensationalistic mediaclaims, there is also little evidence to suggest that blockchain applications areused in terrorist financing (Fernholz, 2015: 32, 33).
Initial suggestions that theperpetrators of the November 2015 Paris terrorist attacks had utilised CCs turnedout to be unfounded (Perez, 2015).
While a theoretical risk of enabling terroristsand “money launderers to move illicit funds faster, cheaper, and more discretelythan ever before” (Bryans, 2014: 447), blockchain applications such as CCs haveyet to be shown as concretely used to such ends.
Indeed, legal scholars havewarned that blockchain-based money “laundering opportunities may well bemore perceived than real ” (Stokes, 2013: 5, emphasis added; see also Brown,2016: 332).
Similarly, many technologists claim that the risk of CCs being usedfor money laundering are “inflated” (Eddy Travia, cited in Nicholls, 2016a).Nevertheless, as the following subsection shows, key actors in the internationalAML regime have perceived applications of blockchain technologies as fundamentally challenging their efforts.International responses shaped by the properties of blockchaintechnologiesKey actors in the international AML regime have stressed the illegitimate natureof blockchain applications to CCs.
The Bank of International Settlements (BIS)stressed that because of their distributed global networks and ‘pseudonymity’,CCs “are potentially vulnerable to illicit use” (Committee on Payments andMarket Infrastructures, 2015, emphasis added).
The SWIFT Institute, theadvisory body to the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication, regarded CCs as a particularly lucrative “target of those engaged in drugtrafficking and money laundering” (Valcke et al., 2015: 7).
The InternationalMonetary Fund (IMF) emphasised how CCs “can be used to conceal or disguise76 M.
Campbell-Verduyn and M.
Goguenthe illicit origin or sanctioned destination of funds, thus facilitating the moneylaundering [sic]” (He et al., 2016: 27).
These warnings were echoed by intergovernmental police organisations such as Europol (2015b), who maintained,without offering evidence, that CCs “are being used as an instrument to facilitatecrime, particularly in regard to the laundering of illicit profits”.7 CCs were alsorecognised as a challenge in an initial report issued by the FATF (FinancialAction Task Force, 2013), although subsequent reports acknowledged the potential legitimate usages of CCs (Financial Action Task Force, 2014: 8–9), such asfor remittances (see Rodima-Taylor and Grimes, this volume).The widespread perception that blockchains and their applications constitutedchallenges to the international AML regime informed the particular character ofgovernance response.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime produceda detailed manual for detecting and seizing CCs implicated in money laundering.Together with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),the UNODC began training officials to investigate money laundering throughCCs (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 2017).
Interpol and Europolestablished a joint partnership coordinating police activities “against the abuse ofvirtual currencies for criminal transactions and money laundering” (Europol,2015a).Similarly, the two key features of blockchain technologies – decentralisationand quasi-anonymity – shaped the response of the main intergovernmentalorganisation at the heart of the international AML regime.
First, the FATFrecognised the difficulties of tracing and identifying decentralised transactionsby quasi-anonymity CC users.
As a 2015 report put it, the lack of “central location or entity” to “target … for investigative purposes” effectively “underminescountries’ ability to employ effective, dissuasive sanctions” and “presents asignificant challenge to law enforcement’s ability to trace illicit proceeds that arelaundered” (Financial Action Task Force, 2015: 8–11).
Rather than targeting CCusers, the FATF recommended a focus on CC-to-fiat money exchanges and other‘nodes’ in decentralised blockchain-based systems.
These are the key institutionswhose activities intersect in important manners with what the FATF described as“the regulated fiat currency financial system” (ibid.).
The FATF thereby directedthe focus of international AML efforts towards the centralised institutions that“send, receive, and store” CCs (Financial Action Task Force, 2015: 6) once theyare transferred from state-backed national currencies of the “upperworlds” to the“underworlds” of the global economy (van Duyne et al., 2002).Second, the FATF guidance recommended a flexible set of informal andformal responses to the perceived challenges presented by blockchain applications to global AML governance.
On the one hand, the FATF called for CC-tostate-backed-currency exchanges to be formally registered and monitored inorder to encourage the voluntary enactment of “customer identification/verification and recordkeeping requirements” (Financial Action Task Force, 2015: 11).The FATF suggested that in order to formally register these ‘nodes’ might alsobe obligated to “undertake customer due diligence when establishing businessrelations or when carrying out (non-wire) occasional transactions using reliable,Constitution of technology and global governance 77independent source documents, data or information” (ibid.: 12).
FATF advanced adecentralised approach in recommending that CC exchanges themselves identifyusers through a reliance on government social insurance numbers, internet protocol(IP) addresses, and even use Internet searches in “corroborating activity information consistent with the customer’s transaction profile” (ibid.: 13).
Only whenmoney laundering practices might be suspected did the FATF call for “enhanceddue diligence measures” by governments (ibid.: 8).
Nevertheless, the FATFrecommended state actors remain sensitive to the potential “impact(s) a prohibitionwould have on the local and global level of [money laundering/terrorist finance]ML/TF risks, including whether prohibiting [virtual currency] VC payments activities could drive them underground, where they will continue to operate withoutAML/CFT controls or oversight” (ibid.: 9).
Like other key actors in the international AML regime who stressed how “the decentralised nature of these digitalcurrency schemes means that it is difficult to impose such restrictions on transactions” (Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure, 2015), the FATFrecognised how exchanges and other “easily identifiable institutions with readilydetectable headquarters” (Singh, 2015: 58) are able to relocate to jurisdictions withmore relaxed AML requirements.
Since exchanges specifically, and blockchainbased activities more generally, operate in a distributed environment, they are ableto shift their activities around the world with a fair degree of ease.
The FATFtherefore stressed the need for less coercive “coordination mechanisms” betweenstate and non-state actors (Financial Action Task Force, 2015: 9).
Such measuresinclude sharing of information and knowledge (ibid.: 8), efforts to formulate andadopt “similar AML/CFT treatment for similar products and services havingsimilar risk profiles” (ibid.), and mutual legal assistance between countries ineither seizing assets or potentially extraditing individuals charged with moneylaundering crimes (ibid.: 11).
Once again, though, only when such measures proveto be insufficient does the FATF recommend more coercive strategies be considered, including a “range of effective, proportionate and dissuasive sanctions”that include outright prohibition of blockchain-based activities (ibid.: 9).The response of the intergovernmental organisation at the heart of the international AML regime was shaped and constrained by the particular technicalcharacteristics of blockchains.
The digital, decentralised and quasi-anonymousfeatures of applications of this emergent technology influenced – yet in no waywholly determined – FATF suggestions for a plethora of decentralised initiativesthat provided room for both coercive and flexible responses.
That blockchainapplications like CCs were regarded as challenges to the international AMLregime was not inevitable.
Yet the responses proceed as such and in turn shapedand constrained the evolution of this emergent technology.Blockchain activities shaped by the responses of the internationalAML regimeResponses by the international AML regime to the perceived challenge of blockchain applications influenced the evolution of this emergent technology most78 M.
Campbell-Verduyn and M.
Goguencentrally by encouraging the bifurcation of blockchain-based activities.
On theone hand, the decentralised response of the international AML regime to the perceived challenge of blockchains encouraged AML-compliance by some nonstate actors whose blockchain-based activities became ‘mainstreamed’ into the‘upperworld’ of the global economy.
On the other hand, this flexible responsealso permitted for state strategies that, by harnessing blockchain applications totrack and trace users, have induced other activities further into the ‘underworld’of the global political economy.Voluntary AML compliance and the mainstreaming of blockchainapplicationsThe decentralised and flexible international response to the perceived challengeof blockchain applications encouraged the development of varying AMLcompliant activities by state and non-state actors.
On the one hand, jurisdictionsin several regions of the world sought to distinguish themselves as legitimatecentres for AML-compliant blockchain activities.
Most prominently, New YorkState developed a ‘Bitlicense’, which is granted to actors undertaking “initial andannual risk assessments, ten-year records of all transactions, suspicious activityreports, a customer identification program, checks and compliance, annualinternal or external audits, and no structuring to evade reporting, or obfuscatingidentity” (Kiviat, 2015: 601–2, fn 229).
Competing jurisdictions such as Singapore also sought to attract AML-compliant blockchain-based activities.
The Suspicious Transaction Reporting Office of the city-state actively verifies useridentities and monitors suspicious transactions (Townend, 2015).
The EnglishChannel island of Alderney promotes itself as an AML-compliant blockchainhub (Connell, 2014) in competing for the title of ‘Bitcoin Isle’ with the likes ofthe Isle of Man (Nicholls, 2016b).Meanwhile, several fiat-money-to-CC exchanges have ‘mainstreamed’ theiroperations to become compliant with informal global AML recommendations.The Hong Kong firm BitFinex (n.d.), for example, undertook “a comprehensiveand thorough KYC and AML compliance implementation” involving certifiedcustomer identification documents and valid proof of address.
Hong Kong-basedcompetitor Gatecoin (n.d.), as well as the British exchanges Bitstamp (n.d.) andits rival CEX.IO (n.d.) all enforced AML standards in requiring customers toprovide copies of their passports in verifying their identities.
Although ‘mainstreaming’ blockchain-based activities, these voluntary AML efforts variedconsiderably.
For instance, user identification is only required for accountholders that HitBTC (n.d.) and other CC exchanges deem to be ‘suspicious’.The variance between voluntary industry AML compliance efforts led a set ofcommon industry guidelines to be proposed by a self-regulatory body called theDigital Asset Transfer Authority (DATA).
In seeking to formulate “common riskmanagement and compliance standards” (Digital Asset Transfer Authority, 2015:834), this Delaware-based organisation released a draft set of ‘global AMLguidelines’ for public comment in 2015.
Stressing the balance of AML effortsConstitution of technology and global governance 79with “fundamental rights and values, including civil liberties, financial privacyand inclusion, transparency and accountability”, the draft guidelines advisedfirms operating with CCs to each implement “a basic AML Compliance Programwhether or not required by law” (ibid.: 2, emphasis in original).
The DATArecommended implementing written internal procedures and annual employeetraining on risk-based due diligence assessments overseen by independent chiefcompliance officers.
These draft guidelines suggested firms collect customernames and addresses as well as “consider implementing more in-depth customeridentification and verification procedures – especially for customers and products identified in the risk assessment as high risk” (ibid.: 4).
Examples of ‘indepth’ procedures involved “everything from simply ‘googling’ the person orcompany involved or checking the appropriate government agency for corporateregistration, to requesting banking and other references, to obtaining credit orbusiness reports, and even obtaining a criminal background check” (ibid.: 5).Finally, the draft DATA guidelines8 urged firms to monitor the potential forAML through the “entire cycle of a relationship”.Such industry- and firm-led efforts to develop AML standards and mainstream blockchain-based activities were encouraged by the flexible, decentralised response of the international AML regime.
The 2015 FATF guidancespecifically suggested industry-level associations “develop policies and practicesfor members that allow them to identify specific transactions as coming from amember that has applied appropriate CDD and is conducting appropriate transaction monitoring” (Financial Action Task Force, 2015: 14).
However, the flexibility provided by the decentralised response of the international AML regimealso provided space for other strategies that alternatively encouraged blockchainactivities to shift deeper into the ‘underworlds’ of the global political economy.Going (further) undergroundThe flexibility of the response by the international AML regime to the perceivedchallenges of blockchains also provided state and quasi-state actors room toexperiment with bans and other governance strategies to discourage specificblockchain applications, namely CCs.
States such as Bangladesh, Bolivia, andEcuador, for example, banned the use of CCs outright.
Other countries, including China and Vietnam, applied CC bans more selectively on financial servicesfirms operating in their jurisdictions (Smart, 2015; see Jia and Zhang, thisvolume).
A number of central banks have also sought to discourage the use ofCCs.
In Iceland the purchase of CCs was regarded by its central bank as a violation of the Foreign Exchange Act, while in Indonesia the central bank announcedthat “Bitcoin and other virtual currency are not currency or legal payment”(Bank Indonesia, 2014).
Looser discouragements emanated from the EuropeanCentral Bank (2016: 2), which warned financial authorities in the EuropeanUnion to “take care not to appear to promote the use of privately establisheddigital currencies”.
Similarly, the European Banking Authority (2014) suggestedthat regional authorities “discourage” credit institutions from dealing in CCs.980 M.
Campbell-Verduyn and M.
GoguenTogether, these varying governance strategies directly encouraged blockchainactivities to shift or remain in the ‘underworld’ rather than enter the mainstream‘upperworlds’ of the global economy.The flexibility provided by the international AML regime also provided stateand non-state actors space to harness blockchain technologies for identifyingusers that have further prompted blockchain-based activities to shift underground.
Companies such as BlockTrail and Coinalytics have provided servicesenhancing the ability of intergovernmental police organisations such as Europoland Interpol to match CC transactions with individual profiles by locating particular patterns of use (Basquill, 2015).
Transaction flows associated with specific user identities have been developed with the help of ‘forensic’ computerscientists (Luu and Imwinkelried, 2016).
While encouraging the mainstreamingof some blockchain activities, efforts to identify specific users for AML purposessparked countervailing anonymisation services seeking to frustrate the possibilities of AML regulators identifying CC users.
So-called ‘anonymisers’ transferCCs in and out of state-backed currencies using different identities.
Meanwhile,other ‘mixer’ or ‘tumbler’ services with names such as BitLaundry and BitcoinFog were developed to allow CC users to pool together in order to prevent identity tracking by ‘mixing’ and joining transactions together into unpredictablecombinations (Böhme et al., 2015; Scafuro and Shipman, 2017).10 In a finalinstance, new CCs such as Zcash (n.d.) and Zerocoin (n.d.) as well as Dash(n.d.), formerly known as Darkcoin, were developed to ostensibly provide userscomplete anonymity in transactions.
These new CCs, along with anonymisersand ‘mixing services’, can all be understood principally as counter-reactions toconcerns that Bitcoin and blockchain-based transactions more generally are nolonger as anonymous as initially believed (Heilman et al., 2017: 1).
Efforts toeffectively ‘follow the money’ in identifying blockchain users, permitted by theflexibility of the AML regime, have thereby pushed blockchain activities furtherinto the ‘underworlds’ of the global economy.The development of services seeking to frustrate state AML efforts illustrateshow the response of the international AML regime to the perceived challenge ofblockchains has in turn shaped blockchain-based activities in manners that wereinitially difficult to predict.
While bans and other state and quasi-state efforts todiscourage the use of blockchain technologies can be expected to push suchactivities further into the ‘underworlds’ of the global economy, other ostensiblymore permissive state activities have also had similar effects.
The New YorkState Bitlicense, for instance, was considered by many industry participants as“very innovation unfriendly” and resulted in an “exodus” (del Castillo, 2015) ofCC operators in less AML-compliant jurisdictions (Van Valkenburgh, 2015).11Just like efforts to find the identities of blockchain users by drawing on the emergent technology itself, seemingly well-meaning state activities instigated a shiftof blockchain-based activities in the ‘underworlds’ of the global economy.Constitution of technology and global governance 81Technologies and global governance: a mutually constitutiverelationshipTechnological change can pose varying challenges and opportunities for globalgovernance.
The case of blockchain applications since 2008 stresses how keyactors in the international AML regime regarded applications of the emergenttechnology primarily as challenges.
Their responses in turn influenced the development of activities enabled by the emergent technology.
Some non-state actorssought to alter their practices in order to remain beyond government surveillance, while others sought to comply with key stipulations of the internationalregime.
Such bifurcated technological development is, of course, not solely theresult of responses by the international AML regime.
Neither technology norinternational regimes have ‘complete control’ over one another.
Yet neither is‘out of control’.
The relationships between technology and key actors underpinning global governance do not merely flow one-way.
Both influence and mutually constitute one another in particular manners that are often surprising andunexpected.ConclusionBy investigating relationships between blockchain technologies and the international anti-money-laundering (AML) regime, this chapter has illustrated anunderappreciated element of global governance: the mutual constitution of international regimes and emergent technologies.
Our analysis highlighted this mutually constitutive relationship in two steps.
First, the decentralised andquasi-anonymous features of blockchain technologies were shown to haveshaped and constrained the responses of the leading actor in the internationalAML regime, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF).
The FATF emphasised adecentralised approach to the perceived challenges of blockchains.
Rather thanthe users of CCs, specific institutions at the nexus of blockchain-based activitiesand the mainstream economy were targeted and encouraged to pursue their own,at times divergent, approaches to AML compliance.
States were also encouragedto experiment with both flexible and coercive approaches in achieving a sharedoverarching goal: ensuring that blockchain activities occur in a financial ‘upperworld’ rather than disappear into the financial ‘underworld’.In a second step this chapter illustrated how the particular governance responsesof the international AML regime shaped and constrained the evolution of blockchain applications.
Decentralised and flexible response to the perceived challengesof this emergent technology influenced the evolution of blockchain-based activities.
Blockchain applications became increasingly bifurcated into an ‘upperworld’compliant with international AML efforts and an ‘underworld’ that sought tomaintain the very features of the technology that were perceived to challenge AMLefforts.
On the one hand, voluntary AML-compliant state and non-state activitiescontributed to the ‘mainstreaming’ of blockchain applications.
On the other hand,official bans on the most prominent blockchain applications and the harnessing of82 M.
Campbell-Verduyn and M.
Goguenthe technology for identifying potential money launderers encouraged anothersegment of blockchain-based activities to shift further underground, into the‘underworlds’ of the global political economy.More generally, this chapter stressed how neither technologies nor international regimes exist in abstract voids.
Global governance operates withinsocio-technical environments where specific features of technologies shape andconstrain the activities of key actors in unexpected manners.
It was certainly notpredetermined that blockchain applications such as cryptocurrencies would bemainly perceived as challenges rather than opportunities for global AML governance efforts, although it certainly makes sense that they were.
Key actors inthe international AML regime, such as the FATF, acknowledged the importantopportunities for tracking and tracing international financial transactions to begained from blockchains.
Similarly, it was not predetermined that the harnessingof these emergent technologies for state surveillance purposes would be negatively perceived by blockchain users and instigate a backlash that shifted someblockchain-based activities further into the ‘underworlds’ of the global politicaleconomy.
Indeed, some non-state actors perceived state attempts to harnessblockchain technologies as profit opportunities to market and sell their expertise.Overall, the predominantly negative perception of blockchain applications aschallenges to existing forms of governance was shaped by the specific featuresof these emergent technologies and instigated responses that in turn have shapedthe evolution of the emergent technology in particular manners.Examining the co-evolution of technologies and governance providesopportunities for more nuanced understanding of the often-unexpected changesin the socio-technical environments in which international regimes operate.There is much to be gained from considering how emergent technologies suchas blockhains and the international AML regime mutually evolve.
Furtherresearch might investigate how and why state and non-state actors perceivedregulatory and technological developments as challenges, as well as the normative implications arising from the responses to such perceptions.
When thenovel features of emergent technologies are regarded primarily as challenges,or as tools akin to nails, international responses can function as hammerswhose coercive thrusts respond to one challenge yet undermine more beneficial possibilities that might also be afforded.
It is highly unlikely that moneylaundering, whether in CCs or state-backed currencies, will ever be completelyeradicated (Tsingou, 2010).
Beyond Bitcoin and CC-to-national moneyexchanges, the laundering of money continues to occur in the ‘upperworld’ ofglobal finance and involve mainstream financial institutions such as banks (e.g.Corkery and Protess, 2017).
In attempting to combat this activity, other potentially beneficial innovations, such as improvements of payments to whistleblowers or the facilitation of remittances, may be hampered or even stampedout.
Understanding how wider socio-technical environments and global governance mutually constitute one another helps foreground other possibleresponses to technological changes in the global political economy.
Scholars,policy-makers, and citizens alike will benefit from a more nuanced understandingConstitution of technology and global governance 83of both the potential benefits and risks accrued from a sensitivity to the coevolution of technology and global governance.AcknowledgementsThe feedback and support of Mark Nance and Stephen J.
Kay, as well as participants in the ‘FATF @ 25’ workshop at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta in2016 is gratefully acknowledged.
Malcolm Campbell-Verduyn acknowledgesresearch support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council ofCanada (award no.
756-2015-0474).Notes1 Material from this section draws on Campbell-Verduyn (forthcoming 2017).2 Although it has become common to deal with terrorist financing and money laundering conjointly (Kingah and Zwartjes, 2015: 343), these activities pose fundamentallyalternative problems for law enforcement (Abeyratne, 2011: 68; Donahue, 2006: 394)This chapter concentrates on the former.3 For a list of full members, associate members, and observers of the FATF, see www.fatf-gafi.org/about/membersandobservers/4 The problem of ensuring that money that is transferred over long distances andborders is not simultaneously retained and used by an individual to purchase goodsmore than once.5 The record of individual transactions is publicly broadcast on blockchains, meaningthat a digital trail can be traced in ‘following the money’.
The ledger of transactionsprovides a trail that can be followed in ways that the use of conventional bills andcoins cannot.
Yet, as we discuss further below, a range of further new techniques frustrate this identification.6 The US Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) shut down the original Silk Road in2013.
Silk Road 2.0 subsequently appeared but was closed down in a 17-countryoperation by police agencies.
Silk Road 3.0 opened in mid-2016 and remains open atthe time of writing, though faces competition from other marketplaces such as DreamMarket and Valhalla.7 Europol (2015b: 46) also offers no supporting evidence for claims that Bitcoin hasfeatured “heavily in many EU law enforcement investigations, accounting for over40% of all identified criminal-to-criminal payments”.8 Which remain open for comment at the time of writing.9 The money laundering potential of CCs had attracted formal attention in the EuropeanUnion following the November 2015 Paris terrorist attacks as the European Commission proposed to amend the Fourth Anti-Money Laundering Directive to bring CCexchanges under existing AML laws and create a central database registering CC useridentities.10 See for instance the anonymisation method ‘CoinJoin’: https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/CoinJoin11 Though it should be noted that some two dozen firms, including the prominentexchange Coinbase, have remained in the state and applied for such a licence.BibliographyAbeyratne, R.
(2011).
Suppression of the financing of terrorism.
Journal of Transportation Security, 4(1): 57–71.84 M.
Campbell-Verduyn and M.
GoguenBank Indonesia.
(2014, 6 February).
Statement of Bank Indonesia related to Bitcoin andother virtual currency.
Retrieved 27 August 2016 from www.bi.go.id/en/ruang-media/siaran-pers/Pages/SP_160614.aspxBasquill, J.
(2015, 12 October).
Interpol reveals Bitcoin tracking research.
BlockchainBriefing.Best, J.
(2003).
From the top–down: The new financial architecture and the re-embeddingof global finance.
New Political Economy, 8(3): 363–84.Bitfinex.
(n.d.).
Terms of service.
Retrieved 27 August 2016 from www.bitfinex.com/termsBitstamp.
(n.d.).
Bitstamp limited antimoney laundering (“AML”) and counter terroristfinancing (“CTF”) policy.
Retrieved 27 August 2016 from www.bitstamp.net/amlpolicy/Bjerg, O.
(2016).
How is Bitcoin money? Theory, Culture and Society, 33(1): 53–72.Böhme, R., Christin, N., Edelman, B., and Moore, T.
(2015).
Bitcoin: Economics, technology, and governance.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(2): 213–38.Boles, J.R.
(2015).
Financial sector executives as targets for money laundering liability.American Business Law Journal, 52(3).Brown, S.D.
(2016).
Cryptocurrency and criminality: The Bitcoin opportunity.
PoliceJournal, 89(4): 327–39.Bryans, D.
(2014).
Bitcoin and money laundering: Mining for an effective solution.Indiana Law Journal, 89, 441–72.Campbell-Verduyn, M.
(forthcoming, 2017).
Bitcoin, crypto-coins, and global antimoney laundering governance.
Crime, Law, and Social Change.CEX.IO.
(n.d.).
AML/KYC policy.
Retrieved 27 August 2016 from https://cex.io/aml-kycChong, A., and Lopez-De-Silanes, F.
(2015).
Money laundering and its regulation.
Economics and Politics, 27(1): 78–123.Choo, K.-K.R.
(2009).
Money laundering and terrorism financing risks of prepaid cardsinstruments? Asian Criminology, (4): 11–30Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures.
(2015).
Digital currencies.
Basel:Bank for International Settlements.Commonwealth Working Group on Virtual Currencies.
(2015).
Working group report.Retrieved 24 November 2016 from http://thecommonwealth.org/sites/default/files/press-release/documents/P14195_ROL_Virtual_Currencies_D_Tait_V5_LoRes.pdfConnell, J.
(2014).
Alderney: Gambling, Bitcoin and the art of unorthodoxy.
IslandStudies Journal, 9(1): 69–78.Corkery, M., and Protess, B.
(2017, 22 May).
Citigroup agrees to $97.4 million settlement in money laundering inquiry.
New York Times.Dash.
(n.d.).
What is Dash? Retrieved 27 August 2016 from www.dash.org/del Castillo, M.
(2015, 12 August).
The ‘Great Bitcoin Exodus’ has totally changed NewYork’s Bitcoin ecosystem.
New York Business Journal.DeNardis, L.
(2014).
The global war for internet governance.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.Digital Asset Transfer Authority.
(2015).
Draft anti-money laundering guidelines.Retrieved 22 August 2017 from http://datauthority.org/blog/2015/07/01/global-amlkyc-guidelines-data/Donohue, L.
(2006).
Anti-terrorist finance in the United Kingdom and United States.Michigan Journal of International Law, 27(2): 303.European Banking Authority.
(2014).
Opinion on ‘virtual currencies’.
Op/2014/08.European Central Bank.
(2016).
Opinion of the European Central Bank.
Retrieved 23November 2016 from www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/en_con_2016_49_f_sign.pdfConstitution of technology and global governance 85Europol.
(2015a, 2 October).
Europol Interpol Cybercrime Conference makes the case formultisector cooperation.
Retrieved 27 August 2016 from www.europol.europa.eu/latest_news/europol-%E2%80%93-interpol-cybercrime-conference-makes-casegreater-multisector-cooperationEuropol.
(2015b).
The internet organised crime threat assessment.
Retrieved 16 August2016 from www.europol.europa.eu/iocta/2015/Fernholz, T.
(2015).
Terrorism finance trackers worry ISIS already using Bitcoin.
DefenseOne, 13.Financial Action Task Force.
(2016).
International standards on combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism and proliferation: The FATF recommendations.Retrieved 15 August 2016 from www.fatfgafi.org/media/fatf/documents/recommendations/pdfs/FATF_Recommendations.pdfFinancial Action Task Force.
(2015).
Guidance for a risk-based approach: Virtual currencies.
Retrieved 15 August 2016 from www.coe.int/t/dghl/monitoring/moneyval/Publications/Guidance-RBA-Virtual-Currencies.pdfFinancial Action Task Force.
(2014).
Virtual currencies: Key definitions and potentialAML/CFT risks: FATF report.
Retrieved 15 August 2016 from www.fatf gafi.org/media/fatf/documents/reports/virtual-currency-key-definitions-and-potential-aml-cftrisks.pdfFinancial Action Task Force.
(2013).
Guidance for a risk-based approach to prepaid cards,mobile payments and internet-based payment services.
Retrieved 15 August 2016 fromwww.fatf gafi.org/publications/fatfrecommendations/documents/rba-npps-2013.htmlGatecoin.
(n.d.).
Anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing (AML/CFT)policy summary statement.
Retrieved 27 August 2016 from https://gatecoin.com/amlpolicyGilpin, R.
(2011).
Global political economy: Understanding the international economicorder.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.Gruber, S.
(2013).
Trust, identity and disclosure: Are Bitcoin exchanges the next virtualhavens for money laundering and tax evasion.
Quinnipiac Law Review, 32: 135.Hasenclever, A., Mayer, P., and Rittberger, V.
(1997).
Theories of international regimes.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.He, D., Habermeier, K., Leckow, R., Haksar, V., Almeida, Y., Kashima, M., et al.
(2016).Virtual currencies and beyond: Initial considerations.
IMF Staff Discussions Note 16/03.Heilman, E., AlShenibr, L., Baldimtsi, F., Scafuro, A., and Goldberg, S.
(2017).
TumbleBit: An untrusted bitcoin-compatible anonymous payment hub.
Paper presented at theNetwork and Distributed System Security Symposium, 26 February–1 March.
SanDiego, California.Her Majesty’s Treasury and Home Office.
(2015).
UK national risk assessment of moneylaundering and terrorist financing.
London: Stationery Office.Hett, W.
(2008).
Digital currencies and the financing of terrorism.
Richmond Journal ofLaw and Technology, 15: 1.HitBTC.
(n.d.).
HitBTC terms of use.
Retrieved 27 August 2016 from https://hitbtc.com/terms-of-useIsa, Y.M., Sanusi, Z.M., Haniff, M.N., and Barnes, A.
(2015).
Money laundering risk:From the bankers’ and regulators’ perspectives.
Procedia Economics and Finance,28: 7–13.Keohane, R.O.
(1983).
Theory of world politics: Structural realism and beyond.
In A.W.Finifter (ed.) Political science: The state of the discipline.
Washington: AmericanPolitical Science Association.86 M.
Campbell-Verduyn and M.
GoguenKingah, S., and Zwartjes, M.
(2015).
Regulating money laundering for terrorism financing: EU–US transnational policy networks and the financial action task force.
Contemporary Politics, 21(3): 341–53.Kiviat, T.I.
(2015).
Beyond Bitcoin: Issues in regulating blockchain transactions.
DukeLaw Journal, 65: 569–608.Kostakis, V., and Giotitsas, C.
(2014).
The (A)political economy of bitcoin.
tripleC:Communication, capitalism and critique.
Open Access Journal for a Global Sustainable Information Society, 12(2): 431–40.Krasner, S.
(1983).
Structural causes and regime consequences: Regimes as intervening variables.
In S.
Krasner (ed.) International regimes.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.Levi, M.
(2015).
Money for crime and money from crime: Financing crime and laundering crime proceeds.
European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research, 1–23.Levi, M., and Reuter, P.
(2006).
Money laundering.
Crime and Justice, 34(1): 289–375.Luu, J., and Imwinkelried, E.J.
(2016).
The challenge of Bitcoin pseudo-anonymity tocomputer forensics.
Criminal Law Bulletin.Macurak, A.B.
(2014).
Regulating Bitcoin: Capstone strategic project for the AmericanBankers Association.
Stonier Graduate School of Banking.
Retrieved 22 August 2017from www.abastonier.com/stonier/wp-content/uploads/2014-Macurak-Andrew.pdfMalkin, L., and Elizur, Y.
(2002).
Terrorism’s money trail.
World Policy Journal, 19(1):60–70.Masciandaro, D.
(2004).
Combating black money: Money laundering and terrorismfinance, international cooperation and the G8 role.
International Cooperation and theG8 Role.
Universita di Lecce Economics Working Paper, 56/26.Nicholls, J.
(2016a, 8 January).
Are decentralised currencies better at curing AML woes?Experts Split.
Blockchain Briefing.Nicholls, J.
(2016b, 6 January).
Isle of Man sees blockchain through prism of e-gamingtriumphs.
Blockchain Briefing.Onuf, N.
(1989).
World of our making.
Columbia, SC: University of South CarolinaPress.Perez, Y.
(2015, 20 November).
Bitcoin, Paris and terrorism: What the media got wrong.Coindesk.Ping, H.
(2004).
Banking secrecy and money laundering.
Journal of Money LaunderingControl, 7(4): 376–82.Porter, T.
(2003).
Technical collaboration and political conflict in the emerging regimefor international financial regulation.
Review of International Political Economy, 10:520–51.Porter, T.
(1993).
States, markets, and regimes in global finance.
New York: St.
MartinsPress.Reus-Smit, C.
(1997).
The constitutional structure of international society and the natureof fundamental institutions.
International Organization, 51(4): 555–89.Reynolds, J.A.
(2002).
The new US anti-money laundering offensive: Will it prove successful? Cross Cultural Management: An International Journal, 9(3): 3–31.Rubenfeld, S.
(2015, 2 July).
FATF pushes risk-based approach toward virtual currencies,services.
Wall Street Journal.Scafuro, A., and Shipman, M.
(2017, 8 February).
New system makes it harder to trackBitcoin transactions.
NC State University News.
Retrieved 22 August 2017 from https://news.ncsu.edu/2017/02/tumblebit-bitcoin-2017/Sharman, J.C.
(2008).
Power and discourse in policy diffusion: Anti-money laundering indeveloping states.
International Studies Quarterly, 52(3): 635–56.Constitution of technology and global governance 87Singh, K.
(2015).
New Wild West: Preventing money laundering in the Bitcoin network.NorthWestern Journal of Technology and Intellectual Property, 13(1): 38–64.Shields, P.
(2005a).
The ‘information revolution’, financial globalisation, state power andmoney-laundering.
Journal of International Communication, 11(1): 15–39.Shields, P.
(2005b).
When the ‘information revolution’ and the US security state collide:Money laundering and the proliferation of surveillance.
New Media and Society, 7(4):483–512.Smart, E.
(2015, 27 May).
Top 10 countries in which Bitcoin is banned.
CryptoCoinNews.Stokes, R.
(2013).
Anti-money laundering regulation and emerging payment technologies.
Banking and Financial Services Policy Report, 32(5): 1–10.Stokes, R.
(2012).
Virtual money laundering: The case of Bitcoin and the Linden dollar.Information and Communications Technology Law, 21(3): 221–36.Straub, J.P.
(2001).
The prevention of e-money laundering: Tracking the elusive audittrail.
Suffolk Transnational Law Revue, 25, 515.Stringer, K.D.
(2011).
Tackling threat finance: A labor for Hercules or Sisyphus? Parameters, 41(1): 101.Townend, D.
(2015, 19 November).
Singapore PM makes blockchain leader case.
Blockchain Briefing.Tropina, T.
(2014).
Fighting money laundering in the age of online banking, virtual currencies and internet gambling.
ERA Forum, 15(1): 69–84.Tsingou, E.
(2010).
Global financial governance and the developing anti-money laundering regime: What lessons for international political economy? International Politics,47(6): 617–37.Unger, B.
(2013).
Can money laundering decrease? Public Finance Review, 41(5):658–76.Unger, B.
(2009).
Money laundering – A newly emerging topic on the internationalagenda.
Review of Law and Economics, 5(2): 807–19.United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
(2017, 1 February).
UNODC helps tackleBitcoin banking fraud and money laundering.
Retrieved 22 August 2017 from www.unodc.org/unodc/en/frontpage/2017/February/unodc-helps-tackle-bitcoin-bankingfraud-and-money-laundering.htmlValcke, P., Vandezande, N., and van de Velde, N.
(2015).
The evolution of third partypayment providers and cryptocurrencies under the EU’s upcoming PSD2 and AMLD4.SWIFT Institute, Working paper number 2015-001.van Duyne, P.C., von Lampe, K., and Passas, N.
(2002).
Upperworld and underworld incross-border crime.
Nijmegen: Wolf Legal Publishers.Van Valkenburgh, P.
(2015, 2 June).
Tracking Bitcoin regulation state by state.
CoinCentre.Wendt, A.
(1992).
Anarchy is what states make of it: The social construction of powerpolitics.
International Organization, 46(2): 391–425Wessel, J.
(2006).
The financial action task force: A study in balancing sovereignty withequality in global administrative law.
Widener Law Revue, 13: 169.Yelowitz, A., and Wilson, M.
(2015).
Characteristics of Bitcoin users: An analysis ofGoogle search data.
Applied Economics Letters, 22(13): 1030–36.Zcash.
(n.d.).
About.
Retrieved 22 November 2016 from https://z.cash/Zdanowicz, J.S.
(2004).
Money laundering and terrorist financing.
Communications of theACM, 47(5): 53.Zerocoin Project.
(n.d.).
What is Zerocoin? Retrieved 27 August 2016 from http://zerocoin.org/5 Between liberalization andprohibitionPrudent enthusiasm and thegovernance of Bitcoin/blockchaintechnologyKai Jia and Falin ZhangIntroduction: bring the state back inThe implications of technology for global governance are generally classifiedinto two conflicting narratives.
On the one hand are tales of hope based onoptimistic ideas that advances in technology will improve governance (Kurzweil,2005; Pielke et al., 2008).
On the other hand are tales of dystopia based onpessimistic ideas that new technologies have negative consequences forgovernance (Matthewman, 2011).
The former assumes that technologicaldevelopments lead to improvement of economic productivity and elevatedhuman living conditions.
The latter skeptical attitudes focus more oncatastrophes and pending risks of annihilation caused by technologicaladvancement such as nuclear weapons, toxic particles, etc.Both tales are over-simplifications of a much more complex intertwinedrelationship between technology and governance (Mayer et al., 2014a, 2014b).They each consider technology as exogenous to rather than deeply implicated inthe fabric of governance.
Technology is embedded in the power structure ofpeople’s daily lives and is modified all the time.
The limitation of “two tales” oftechnology leads us beyond superficial instrumentalism and to focus on thedeeper relationship between technology and governments, enterprises,individuals, etc.In the 1960s, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development(OECD) promoted the concept of “knowledge economy/society,” whichemphasized the development of technology as an indicator of state capacity(Singleton, 2008).
Technology became recognized as a central battlefield forstate power competition and was increasingly considered to be a decisive factorfor not only economic growth but also social welfare.
For instance, intellectualproperty (IP) rights quickly became the most controversial areas of rivalinginterests among countries (May, 2013).Yet, like in previous periods, states did not play the sole governance roles inthe era of “knowledge economy/society.” With the development of informationand communication technologies (ICTs), especially the emergence andexpansion of the Internet, technology empowered enterprises as well asBetween liberalization and prohibition  89individuals to communicate and transact across borders.
This eroded, but did noteliminate, the controlling power of sovereign countries.
States have adjusted tothe networked global information society from more hierarchical structures.
TheSnowden leaks revealed the breadth and depth of digital surveillance ofgovernments in partnership with private firms such as Apple, Microsoft, etc.(Foster and McChesney, 2014).
Despite the intricate relationships with non-stateactors around the globe, states are still located in the center of the power field.The policy responses of states to technology remain as important as ever, even ifstates are not the only actor determining their consequences.The advent of Bitcoin and related blockchain technologies exemplify thesepower dynamics.
On the one hand, the disintermediation they provide inenabling individuals to transact directly without centralized institutionsempowers people against the control of governments or central banks.
On theother hand, centralized institutions are not completely circumvented by suchtechnology.
To the contrary, the policy responses from governments influencethe development path of Bitcoin specifically and blockchain technologies moregenerally.This chapter explains the interactive relationship between blockchain technology and the corresponding policy responses of governments it has provoked.We examine two questions: what are the challenges that Bitcoin has brought tostates? How have states responded to these challenges? We therefore bring thestate back in the analysis of political dynamics evoked by technological change,illustrating how states influence the development of emergent technologiesthrough their different policies.We develop a model illustrating three types of policy responses that areexemplified by three states: the US, Russia, and China.
The US is where most ofthe Bitcoin developer communities are located, while China is the largest Bitcoinmarket globally.
Despite the relatively limited influence of Russia in the field ofhigh-tech, it is a major state whose policies have implications regionally andeven globally.
We plot governance responses along a continuum, with laissezfaire at one end (US), prohibition (Russia) at the other end, to argue that amiddle ground “prudent enthusiasm” (China) position provides the best balancebetween the risks and opportunities presented by blockchain technologies.This argument has implications for countries in the Global South that arestruggling to narrow the gap that seems to be widening because of the technology advancements in the Global North.
Bitcoin may serve as yet another catalyst polarizing North–South developmental divides.
As we elaborate, GlobalSouth countries tend to avoid emergent technology because of their incapabilityto bear and manage the accompanying uncertainties and risks that Global Northcountries are better able to bear because of first-mover advantages.
We situatethe alternative policy choices for the governance of Bitcoin globally to find abalanced middle path for benefiting from the technology while at the same timekeeping risk at an acceptable level.
We argue that with this approach countries inthe Global South may be capable of navigating through the dilemma betweentechnology adoption and uncontrollable risk.90 K.
Jia and F.
ZhangThe chapter proceeds in five sections.
The proceeding section reviewsexisting global governance and global political economy literatures on theimplications of technology change.
The third section explores the origins ofBitcoin and the challenges it has brought for governance.
The fourth sectionanalyzes the policy responses of different countries, summarizing three distinctapproaches.
Finally, the concluding section extends our analysis to the discussionbetween the Global North and Global South, illustrating the policy alternativesthat the former could learn and from which the latter may choose.Literature review and methodologyNearly a decade since its inception, the global popularity of Bitcoin reveals theincreasingly established nature of the emergent technology (Young, 2016).
Compared with earlier crypto-technologies, Bitcoin for the first time realizes decentralization and quasi-anonymity simultaneously.
Blockchain technologies notonly permit distributed peer-to-peer transactions, but also allow varying degreesof individual anonymity by way of digital encryption (Nakamoto, 2008).
Similarto other technologies such as telegram or Internet, the potential influence ofBitcoin on society and the corresponding response from states go well beyond itstechnical achievements.
Technological advancement not only provides individuals the capacity to do things once impossible, but also has the potential toreshuffle power relations (Feenberg, 2012).
Bitcoin itself should be consideredas the result of a political struggle, rather than merely a technological achieve- rather than merely a technological achieve than merely a technological achievement.
Therefore, it is critical to deliberate on the interactive relationship betweenBitcoin and the political response from governments, especially the relevant regulatory policies.The social implications of technology, especially the interactive relationshipbetween technology and policy responses, is a long-standing GPE issue (Ruggie,1975; Rosenau and Singh, 2002).
Like any other technology innovation, theadvent of Bitcoin, as well as the blockchain technologies, has attracted broadinterests of state and non-state sectors alike.
Blockchains have already beenapplied in numerous fields such as finance (Wharton, 2016), insurance (Wangand Safavi, 2016), accounting (Lazanis, 2015), ride-hailing (Buntinx, 2016), andeven the legal profession (Raczynkski, 2016).
The emergent technology is confronting power structures in manners that have significant socio-economic andpolitical implications.However, academic analysis of the governance challenges that Bitcoininvoked and the corresponding policy responses of the states remains insufficient.
A small but growing literature has begun to consider the governanceproblems of Bitcoin and blockchain technology, focusing mainly on the selfgovernance of the Bitcoin community consisting of developers, miners, andother stakeholders (De Filippi and Loveluck, 2016; Gasser et al., 2015).
Therole of the state and its policy choices are largely ignored in existing academicanalysis.
This is important to analyse, however, as the policy response fromstates will not only affect the future development of Bitcoin in particular andBetween liberalization and prohibition 91blockchain technology in general, but also their implications on the global political economy.The policy responses of sovereign countries can be classified into three categories: liberalization, prohibition, and prudent enthusiasm.
These responsesinclude the formal regulations developed by governments towards technology inthe format of laws, statutes, or investigations.
Although non-government actorssuch as enterprises and social groups also play an important part in regulationsthat would influence the development of Bitcoin, they are not the central concernof this chapter.
We mainly focus on the policy responses of states, as they arenot only critical to sustain the shocks caused by technology advancement, butalso obligatory for stakeholders that would determine the future development oftechnology.Methodologically, our analysis is based on three case studies of the US, Russia,and China.
Bitcoin is confronted with different regulatory policies in differentcountries, which as a whole can be modeled across a spectrum.
On the right of thespectrum, it is the liberalization approach, which is characterized by the US, wherefew formal regulations are imposed on Bitcoin other than some basic requirementssuch as anti-money-laundering (see Campbell-Verduyn and Goguen, this volume).On the left of the spectrum, Bitcoin is completely prohibited by authorities.
Of thecountries on the left of the spectrum, Russia is the most prominent, not onlybecause it is one of the major players in global governance, but particularlybecause of its influence on the policy choices of Eastern European countries, suchas Ukraine, where many core developers and main miners come from in theBitcoin global network (Tillet and Lesser, 2014).
China lies in the middle ofthe two ends of the spectrum.
As the largest Bitcoin market and jurisdiction wherethe main miners are located, China is considered one of the two most importantcountries to blockchain governance besides the US (Coleman, 2016).
Therefore, itis interesting to examine the regulatory responses of Chinese authorities to seewhether it is truly possible to develop alternative policy choices besides the twopolarized extremes.
Our spectrum is illustrated in Figure 5.1.The extant literature largely ignores the regulation of Bitcoin in China.
Weseldom see academic analysis of Chinese regulation in the Western world, whileChinese scholars are busy introducing Western ideas and institutions, overlooking the value of endogenous innovation in China (Li, 2013).
This chapter examines a spectrum of regulation all over the world to highlight the novelty of theregulatory experiment in China.
As an authoritative state, China is often considered as advancing a conservative approach to the emergence and developmentof emergent technologies (Abrami et al., 2014).
From liberal perspectives, theplanned economy would not be appropriate for technological innovation asProhibitive approach Prudential enthusiasm Liberalized approachFigure 5.1 Spectrum of Bitcoin/blockchain governance.92 K.
Jia and F.
Zhangthe hierarchical administrative institutions of the state are understood to shacklethe development of technology (Hayek, 1945).In contrast, the argument we advance here is that Chinese policy is muchmore flexible than considered from conventional perspectives.
China hasbalanced the risks and benefits of blockchain technology.
As a result, China hasgrown to be the largest Bitcoin market globally.
Despite the existing problemsand uncertainties in the future, China provides both the Global South and theGlobal North an alternative between two other polarized extremes of either liberalization or prohibition.Origins and governance challenges of BitcoinPolitical origins of BitcoinAlthough the Bitcoin White Paper issued on October 31, 2008, by SatoshiNakamoto, the still unknown Bitcoin inventor, was filled with technical detailsand did not mention a word of its political origins, the inception of Bitcoin isstill widely believed to be the result of political struggles and a political manifesto.1 In the genesis block,2 Satoshi wrote the following, which was the headlineof The Times on January 3, 2009:Chancellor on brink of second bailout for banks.(Nakamoto, 2008)Later on January 19, 2009, the British government announced the second-roundbailouts for bankrupting banks, investing nearly $150 billion to buy bank sharesand providing securities for troubled assets.
Among the massive criticisms wasthat the government of a liberal market economy was using taxes to rescue commercial banks responsible for the global financial crisis.
Bitcoin was then presented as an alternative to the centralized banking and finance system.
Based onblockchain technologies, Bitcoin provided a decentralized peer-to-peer transaction network that ostensibly no longer relies on centralized institutions forclearing and endorsement, and has finally diminished the necessity of governments or central banks.The political ideas of Satoshi are not only reflected in the obscure quotationburied in the blockchain, but are also exposed through their daily activities in thecommunity (De Filippi and Loveluck, 2016).
The activity records they left in thecommunity show a clear connection with the ideology of the “cypherpunk movement.” The White Paper on Bitcoin was issued in the online forum organized bya group of hackers, mathematicians, and activists called cypherpunks.The cypherpunk movement originated from the political struggle against theUS government that tried to suppress the development of cryptography in the1990s (Hughes, 1993).
Cypherpunks sought to build an anonymous society usingcryptography as a means of achieving greater privacy and security in the face ofmassive government surveillance.
Despite its focus on privacy, the ultimate goalBetween liberalization and prohibition 93of the cypherpunk movement could be summarized as enabling self-organizeddirect interactions between individuals without relying on external authority forcoordination or coercion (De Filippi and Loveluck, 2016).
In other words, thecypherpunk movement attempted to establish a decentralized society withoutcentralized authority as leaders or controllers, a political pursuit that can also befound in an ancient and important political genre: anarchism (de Geus, 2014).Despite widespread misunderstanding, the essence of anarchism is not “chaoswithout principle” but rather “an organized society without ruler” (Vodovnik,2012; Wachhaus, 2014; de Geus, 2014).
Centralized hierarchical authorities areseen as not only inefficient in an environment replete with uncertainty, but alsodetrimental to the autonomy and creativity of individuals who are ready forcooperation and mutual aid (Kropotkin and Baldwin, 1970).
However, despitethe heavy criticisms from anarchists, centralized authorities remain indispensable for many basic and functional necessities.
Take the monetary system as anexample.
Banks work as clearinghouses and credit endorsement for all kinds oftransactions, while central banks assume the responsibility as the lender of lastresort to sustain stability.
Although anarchists do not trust banks as protectors ofcollective goods, because of the many bank runs or financial crises that haveoccurred over history, it remains impossible to transact without these centralizedinstitutions.
Even traditional electronic coins such as e-cash had to rely on centralized banks to confirm transactions (Chaum, 1983).
It was not until the inception of Bitcoin that a monetary system that ostensibly replaced centralizedauthorities with a peer-to-peer network was established.There is a clear connection between Bitcoin and the political ideals of cypherpunks, as well as anarchists.
The inception of Bitcoin should not be consideredmerely as a technical advancement, but rather a political reform with clear political goals to decentralize traditional monetary systems.
Despite the benefits ofthe decentralized system that anarchists advocate, it is also accused of beinghighly unstable, unaccountable, and unsustainable (Wachhaus, 2014).
The nextsection will discuss problems of Bitcoin and the governance challenges that ithas brought.Challenges for formal governance of BitcoinAs it is still a rather niche market, it is not necessarily for states to directlyregulate Bitcoin.
However, as the Bitcoin market expands and its influenceincreases, the negative effects of the technology become prominent and thegovernance challenges of Bitcoin grow.
These governance challenges could beclassified into three categories: volatility, vulnerability, and illegal use.VolatilityBitcoin is exposed to market risks and volatile speculation.
Investors haveflooded into the market and pumped up Bitcoin prices.
When a fiat currencyis confronted with such speculation, central banks, or states, would usually94  K.
Jia and F.
Zhangissue hedging policies to offset potential price fluctuations.
However, as adecentralized peer-to-peer network, there is no centralized authority to carefully monitor the market changes and make corresponding adjustments.
Inother words, the price of Bitcoin is volatile because of the laissez-faire condition.
Since 2011, Bitcoin has been through at least six significant price fluctuations (Salmon, 2013).As a medium of exchange, merchants and customers pay more attention tothe transaction costs of Bitcoin, rather than the exchange rates to fiat currencies.However, if Bitcoin is to be a store of value or unit of account, the price has tobe stable to satisfy people’s expectation.
Therefore, the price volatility wouldfundamentally harm faith in Bitcoin and would probably end the future ofBitcoin (Farrell, 2013).
Worse still, as the transaction volume of Bitcoin grows,the fluctuation of the Bitcoin market would affect other markets and even theglobal economy.
This is especially serious for the Global South, where economies are fragile.
When serious inflation occurs, residents’ wealth in the GlobalSouth countries would possibly flee outside the borders through the Bitcoinnetwork, despite the regulations on capital outflows, as has occurred in LatinAmerica (Lahrichi, 2016).Price volatility does not necessarily mean that Bitcoin and its market cannotgrow.
The market value of Bitcoin has already exceeded $10 billion despite theprice fluctuations (Jonathan, 2013).
One possible explanation is that mechanismscounteracting the volatility such as derivatives markets have graduallydeveloped.
Yet given their relatively small scale, these markets are insufficientto stabilize the price of Bitcoin.
Therefore, government interventions becomenecessary when the price fluctuation of Bitcoin becomes detrimental to thewhole economic system.1,400US dollarsBitcoin price fluctuations, 2009–17 (US dollars)1,2001,000800600400200July 6,2009Nov.
18,2010April 1,2012Aug.
14,2013Dec.
27,2014May 10,2016Sept.
22,20170Figure 5.2 Bitcoin price fluctuations, 2009–17 (US dollars).Between liberalization and prohibition 95VulnerabilityDespite the relative simplicity of its source code, the Bitcoin protocol is virtuallyunhackable, as the computer science literature has shown.
For example, DanKaminsky (2013), a famous computer security researcher, announced publiclythat he was unable to hack Bitcoin protocol after several attempts.
As long as theprevailing cryptographic methods that Bitcoin adopts remain secure, the Bitcoinprotocol should be impervious to malicious attacks (Whittaker, 2015).
However,this does not necessarily suggest that the entire global Bitcoin network is secure.Applications built on the Bitcoin protocol, including wallets or exchanges, arecritically vulnerable to security risks, which can affect the stability of the wholesystem.For example, in 2012 hackers successfully stole 24,000 Bitcoin (BTC) fromBitfloor (Coldewey, 2012), while in 2015, 19,000 BTC were stolen from Bitstamp (Whittaker, 2015).
Although in these two cases the exchange operatorsrepaid or committed to pay for the victims, the Mt.Gox scandal revealed a muchdifferent case.
Mt.Gox was the first functional Bitcoin exchange to enjoy broadname recognition.
By 2013, it had already taken up 70 percent of global Bitcointransactions.
In 2014, Mt.Gox suddenly filed for bankruptcy in Japan as it hadlost 850,000 BTC in a suspected hack.
Some evidence suggested that a Mt.Goxemployee stole the Bitcoins.
Mt.Gox’s customers still had not been reimbursedby the end of 2014.
The Mt.Gox scandal had a significant impact on the globalBitcoin market as its dollar price plummeted nearly 20 percent in one day.
Fromthis incident, we clearly see the vulnerability of the global Bitcoin network, notbecause of the weakness of the Bitcoin protocol itself, but because of the securityrisks of applications in its ecosystem.The vulnerability of the global Bitcoin network, however, is not dissimilar tothe security risks in traditional finance revolving around state-backed currencies.Fiat currencies can be counterfeited, banks can be robbed, and personal financialinformation can be hacked.
In these conditions, banks should assume theresponsibility for the loss of customers, and when banks went bankrupt, centralbanks and even states would be the last resort.
However, as mentioned above,the decentralized structure of Bitcoin means that there is no centralized authorityto be held accountable for customers who suffer from the vulnerability.
Underthe current laws, exchanges are generally considered to be “firms,” which onlyassume limited liability rather than unlimited liability.
Therefore, the vulnerability of the global Bitcoin network still exists and could harm the developmentand application of the emergent technology.Illegal useBecause of the pseudonymous characteristics of Bitcoin, it is used for ill as wellas for good.
The two most common illegal uses of Bitcoin across jurisdictionsare in digital black markets and for money laundering.
Digital black marketsenable the selling and buying of illicit goods or services.
With the popularity of96 K.
Jia and F.
Zhangthe Internet, online black markets have developed quickly all over the world.The centralized electronic payment systems limit the scale of black markets bytracking the money through banks or third party payment providers.
The adventof Bitcoin provides new opportunities to the online black markets because of itsquasi-anonymity, which makes it difficult to trace the identity of the operatorsand users.
Silk Road, for example, provided an infamous black market exclusively using Bitcoin.
From 2011 to 2013, Silk Road was where thousands ofillegal goods were traded every day, with total monthly transactions amountingto $1.2 million (Christin, 2012).
Although Silk Road was shut down in 2013,other online black markets such as Black Market Reloaded (Mac, 2013) andSheep Marketplace (Bershidsky, 2013) have emerged quickly, both of whichadopted Bitcoin as their alternative payment methods.Another possible illegal use of Bitcoin is international money laundering.
Asa global network, it is easy to transmit ill-gotten money across borders.
Theoretically speaking, Bitcoin is an option for those who attempt to move ill-gottenmoney secretly.
However, this may not be as attractive as it seemed to be.
First,the transaction scope of Bitcoin is limited.
Second, all of the transaction recordsare open and accessible to the public.
Although users’ addresses and identitiesare protected by the encryption technology, it is still possible for law enforcement to confirm suspects, especially when Bitcoins are exchanged with certainfiat currencies, as we saw in the Silk Road case.
Third, political regulations aregradually being imposed on Bitcoin exchanges, which are pressured to complywith anti-money-laundering record-keeping and reporting requirements, as wesee in the European Union (van Wirdum, 2016).When Bitcoin was only a niche market and its influence was limited in scope,these three negative effects were not sufficiently important to necessitate specialregulatory responses by states.
However, as Bitcoin has become increasinglyaccepted worldwide, its influence has increased as well.
The price volatility,security vulnerability, and illegal use can affect the stability of financial systemsand thus become the target of the regulatory departments of the state.
Yet thequestion remains: how can states balance the risks and benefits of this emergenttechnology? In the following section, we further analyze different policy alternatives based on the case study of the US, Russia, and China.Governance of technology: three models of the futureJust as Robert Gilpin (1975) predicted the future international economy in the1970s, the future approaches of the governance of technology can be classifiedinto “three models.” An emerging technology, blockchains and their applicationsto cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin largely exist in a legal “grey area” as theytend not to fit the statutory definitions of either currency or specific financialinstruments.
As we mentioned above, if left unchecked, the downsides of Bitcoinmight not only demolish the cryptocurrency, but more widely affect socialstability and harm the greater public good.
Yet, if more regulatory burdens areimposed than can be sustained, the innovative potential of the technology mightBetween liberalization and prohibition 97be impeded.
Confronted with this dilemma, countries have reacted differently.Some have adopted more laissez-faire policies, while others have adopted moreprohibitive ones.
Besides this polarization, we argue, is a middle waycharacterized by prudent enthusiasm.
In this section, we model three approachesbased on the empirical examples of the US, Russia, and China.Liberalized governance of technology in the United States“Don’t ask permission; ask forgiveness” is a well-known saying in SiliconValley that represents a liberal understanding of state–market relations (Kenneyand Zysman, 2016).
The market is believed to be able to reach Pareto optimalityspontaneously without interferences from exogenous actors, including the state.Following this belief, technological advancement is dealt with through a“liberalized governance” approach that relies less on the state to regulate thedevelopment of technology than the invisible hand of the market.American history is replete with cases characterizing the “liberalizedgovernance” approach to the development of technology.
Take the VOIP (Voiceover Internet Protocol) as an example (Cannon, 2004).
When it first emerged,VoIP did not fit the Communications Act and Federal CommunicationsCommission (FCC) regulations, which only covered voice communications overthe traditional public switched telephone network.
However, the US Congressand FCC charted a path for VoIP that clarified much of the legal ambiguitywithout overburdening the new technology.
As a result, VoIP not only boomed,but also introduced competition to a previously stagnant market that had beenmonopolized by telephone companies (FCC, 2011).Following a similar ideology, the US government also adopted this liberalizedapproach in the governance of Bitcoin and blockchain technology.
The countrynot only allows the transactions using Bitcoin, but also permits and evenencourages market actors, such as financial institutions, to conduct businessbased on the Bitcoin network.However, Bitcoin, and participants in the blockchain ecosystem, are notcompletely free from regulation in this laissez-faire environment.
The US, likenearly every country, has regulatory institutions and laws that do pertain to thegovernance of Bitcoin.
Most existing American regulations concern the illegaluse related to Bitcoin.
For example, in March 2013, the Financial CrimesEnforcement Network (FinCen), the law enforcement department of the USTreasury Department, issued guidance on the application of the Bank SecrecyAct (BSA) to Bitcoin.
The guidance clearly states that the Bitcoin exchanges aresubject to regulations as money transmitters, meaning that they are required toregister with FinCEN, implement anti-money-laundering programs, collectinformation of their customers, keep records of suspicious transactions, etc.(FinCen, 2013).Besides the anti-money-laundering requirements and the regulations againstillegal use in the black markets, however, there are little other formal restraintsand regulations imposed on Bitcoin and its related players in the US and98  K.
Jia and F.
Zhangcountries with similarly liberal political traditions.
Although individual states areprohibited from coining money, privately issued currency, such as Bitcoin, is notforbidden under the US Constitution.3 Furthermore, although both California andNew York passed laws to require enterprises to apply for a license to conductbusinesses related to Bitcoin, these regulations do not prohibit any entity frombecoming involved in this industry.4 Beyond the US, jurisdictions such as HongKong declared it to be unnecessary to regulate Bitcoin businesses or forbidpeople entering this industry as they considered the cryptocurrency not to be asignificant threat to the financial system (Lombardo, 2015).The liberalized approach tends to stimulate the rapid development of newtechnology-related businesses.
Without the barriers set by the state to enter themarket, there will be plenty of resources swarming into markets to promote theresearch and application of technology if it is truly useful and profitable.
Withoutthe distortions from the state, such resource allocation is considered to reachPareto optimality.
However, the liberalized approach has considerable flaws aswell.
For example, without proper regulations from the state, the price volatilityof Bitcoin mentioned above can affect the confidence of investors and harm thedevelopment of the emergent technology.
Additionally, the risks anduncertainties accompanying emergent technology are another concern forauthorities, especially for the Global South, whose financial systems arevulnerable to capital outflows through Bitcoin.
It is for these reasons that somecountries choose another governance approach to emergent technologies,prohibiting them completely.The prohibitory approach in RussiaThe first two countries that banned Bitcoin domestically were Ecuador andBolivia.
In February 2014, Russia became the third and by far the largest, mostimportant country to ban Bitcoin, resulting in chaos of the global Bitcoin market.The Russian Prosecutor General lamented that cybercurrencies had gained toolarge a circulation, becoming money substitutes, and thus were to be bannedaccording to a federal law signed by President Putin in 2002 (Baczynska, 2014).The other official reason was to thwart the potential use of Bitcoin in fundingterrorism, buying illicit goods and services, money laundering, etc.Countries prohibiting Bitcoin completely tend to do so out of concern for theimpacts to their domestic financial systems.
They mainly fear that Bitcoin wouldweaken their capacity to regulate their financial system and that domestic wealthmay flee abroad through the global Bitcoin network.
The countries affected byrapid capital outflows are mainly located in the Global South, while the capitaltends to flow to Global North countries.
Thus, even though all countries areconfronted with the same challenges of capital outflows using Bitcoin, differentcountries are positioned differently in global financial networks, contributing todifferent policy choices.
The unbalanced power structure between the GlobalSouth and Global North underpins the fear of the former countries that emergenttechnology might be used as instruments of the latter to weaken their authority.Between liberalization and prohibition 99Russian officials forbid the circulation of Bitcoin completely because theinvention of Bitcoin was regarded as a conspiracy plotted by foreign troublemakers (Rizzo, 2015).
Besides the three countries mentioned above, Vietnamalso joined in banning the digital currency because of fears of foreignintervention in their economies.The prohibitive approach can certainly help protect countries from risks anduncertainties accompanying emergent technologies such as blockchains.However, there are also flaws to this second governance approach.
Whilereducing risk, hope and opportunities can be reduced at the same time.
Countriesare less able to benefit from the potential that emergent technology offers,harming their developmental potential.
Thus, the question becomes how tobalance the risks and benefits of emergent technology to escape the dilemma thatunprivileged countries usually confront.
A third approach is therefore valuableto assess.A balanced middle ground approach to governance of technology:prudent enthusiasm of ChinaBetween polarized global regulatory responses on Bitcoin exists a middle groundapproach exemplified by China.
Conventionally, China is usually considered tobe slow to react to cutting-edge technology and a follower in the emergingglobal governance of Bitcoin (Abrami et al., 2014).
However, closer analysisreveals that the Chinese government is more active than expected.
The policyresponse of Chinese regulatory institutions is neither laissez-faire nor completelyprohibitory.
Rather, it is a middle way that is not only enthusiastic abouttechnological change, but also prudent in controlling the scope of its impacts.By the end of 2016, China occupied more than 50 percent of the computationpower in the Bitcoin global network.
Thousands mined Bitcoins all across thecountry.
Chinese engineers first designed and used Application Specific IntegratedCircuit (ASIC) to compute the SHA256 algorithm, which is 100 times faster thanconventional computers (CCID, 2014).
Besides the mining industry, China alsooccupies the largest market of Bitcoin transactions, with more than 70 percent ofthe global market share.
The top two Chinese exchanges even occupied nearly 96percent of the global exchange volume at the time of writing.5 The rapiddevelopment of Bitcoin in China is based on the tolerance and enthusiasm of aChinese government that is arguably more inclined to liberalization on theregulation of Bitcoin than the US.
However, Chinese regulatory institutions alsoclosely monitor the development of Bitcoin and are prudent about taking risks thatmay affect the stability of its domestic economic system.
In other words, Chinaadopted a middle way between laissez-faire and complete prohibition.Prudent central bank enthusiasmIn September 2016, the vice-president of the People’s Bank of China (PBC)declared publicly that “digital currency is the inevitable future and the Chinese100 K.
Jia and F.
ZhangCentral Bank needs to pay close attention to the development of crypto-currencythat private sectors issued, like Bitcoin” (Fan, 2016).
The PBC had alreadybegun research on digital currency in 2014 (Liu, 2016).
In contrast to countriessuch as Russia, which consider Bitcoin as a conspiracy plotted by hostile troublemakers, China has embraced it with more enthusiasm.
There are multiple reasonsto explain such enthusiasm, such as the incentive to stimulate the economy, theprofessional capability of the PBC, and soon.
Of these, perhaps the mostimportant is the potential of Bitcoin, and the related blockchain technology, tobe used to improve the efficiency of the Chinese financial system.Although China had steadily conducted macro-economic reforms for morethan three decades, during which its aggregate GDP rose to second worldwide,trailing only the US, there remain fundamental flaws in its financial system.
Forexample, despite tight controls on money flows among banks and other formalinstitutions, the PBC has few data on the money flow outside the formal financialsystem.
These outflows were exaggerated by the recent rapid development ofInternet finance, which greatly amplifies the magnitude of liquidity outside theformal financial system.
In addition, tax evasion is common in China, whichencourages citizens to invest in Bitcoin to avoid taxes.The advancement of digital currency, symbolized by the invention of Bitcoin,provides the Chinese government with opportunities to reform the financialsystem.
The PBC regards digital currency as beneficial for decreasing the cost ofissuance and circulation of paper money, for increasing convenience andtransparency of the economy, and for combatting financial criminality such astax evasion and money laundering (PBC, 2016).
The PBC in 2016 declared itsintention to issue its own digital currency based on blockchain technology assoon as possible (PBC, 2016).
This is in stark contrast to other major countriesor economies, including the US, the EU, and Japan, which chose to wait and seeuntil the potential impacts of digital currency fully unfold.
The PBC was enthusiastic about digital currencies despite their considerable potential downsides.However, this enthusiasm does not necessarily mean that the PBC followed itsAmerican counterparts in pursuing a liberalized approach.
On the contrary, theChinese government was prudent in seeking to avoid risks that may affect thestability of its domestic economic system.Prudent government enthusiasmThe prudence of Chinese regulators is evidenced by the “Notice to Prepare forthe Risks of Bitcoin” jointly issued in December 2013 by five departments,including the PBC, MIIT (Ministry of Industry and Information Technology),CBRC (China Banking Regulatory Commission), CSRC (China SecuritiesRegulatory Commission), and CIRC (China Insurance RegulatoryCommission).
In the form of an administrative order, this notice is the firstregulation in China that officially granted legal status to Bitcoin.
In this notice,Bitcoin is therefore considered to be a virtual commodity asset rather than aform of currency.Between liberalization and prohibition 101Along with other stipulations concerning the illegal use of Bitcoin, the mostimportant article in the 2013 notice was the ruling that all financial institutionsare forbidden to undertake businesses related to Bitcoin.
In addition, paymentinstitutions were banned from providing services to companies conductingBitcoin businesses.
The purpose of this article is to prevent speculation risks inBitcoin from spreading to financial institutions.
As mentioned above, volatilityis one of the three main downsides of Bitcoin, which would probably beleveraged and amplified if financial institutions were to become involved inspeculation, resulting in chain reactions and even a crisis.
Given the limited andrestrained domestic capital markets of China, speculation poses risks higher thanother Global North countries, where individuals can find other ways to allocatetheir capitals.Countries adopting a more liberal governance approach are mainly concernedwith the illicit use of Bitcoin, while underdeveloped countries that ban Bitcoincompletely fear particularly the potential impacts of Bitcoin to their fragilefinancial systems.
China goes beyond the liberal approach to actively restrainspeculation activities of its financial institutions while avoiding a total ban onBitcoin activities.
It is for this reason that China is positioned in the middle alongthe global governance spectrum identified in Figure 5.1.
These regulations areeffective and played an important role in restraining the price vulnerability ofBitcoin (People’s Bank of China, 2014).The Chinese government retains multiple tools to restrain the speculationrisks of Bitcoin.
One of the most important in its regulatory toolkit is thepossibility of implementing harsher regulations, or the background “shadow ofregulation.” Regulators may question key firms when the price of Bitcoinfluctuates sharply, and did so in early 2017 when it rose sharply to exceed $1,000(Zhou, 2017).
The PBC scheduled a meeting with the heads of several mainexchanges about speculation risks.
The news spread that more severe restrictivemeasures might be imposed on the Bitcoin market.
The negative expectationpushed investors to sell Bitcoin and the price went down gradually on theexpectation that the PBC might intervene in the operation of Bitcoin exchangesand investigate whether their transactions satisfy the regulation demands.Table 5.1 lists the major regulation events and policies in China.
ComparingFigure 5.1 and Table 5.1, we see that most of the regulatory interventions of thePBC into the Bitcoin industry in 2013 and 2017 occurred when the price rosequickly.
After these interventions, the global price of Bitcoin decreased quickly.6On the one hand, these interventions and the resulting price declines of Bitcoinindicate the tremendous influence of China on the global Bitcoin market.
On theother hand, these interventions illustrate how Chinese policy response arerelatively effective in preventing the spread of volatility to other markets.The Chinese regulatory policy provides an alternative to the polarized policyoptions discussed before.
Although conventional understandings of China as anauthoritarian state tend to expect a more conservative policy from the Chinesegovernment to manage emergent technology in general and Bitcoin in particular,China has navigated a middle way between the two main existing approaches.Table 5.1 Key events and policies in ChinaDate Key events and policies in ChinaDecember 3, 2013 The PBC and four other ministries of China jointly release the “Notice of Preventing the Risk of Bitcoin,” the first nationalregulation concerning the characteristics and transactions of Bitcoin.
The notice identified Bitcoin as a virtualcommodity rather than one kind of currency and banned any financial and payment institutions from involvement inBitcoin.December 16, 2013 The PBC officially demands third-party payment institutions to cease provision of payment and clearing services forBitcoin exchange platforms.March, 2014 The PBC releases the “Notice on Further Strengthening the Bitcoin Risk Prevention Work,” demanding that commercialbanks and payment institutions stop providing services to the Bitcoin industry immediately.January 1, 2017 The PBC officials meet with managers of the three largest domestic Bitcoin exchange platforms, demanding them to checkunusual fluctuations of Bitcoin and ensure that their operations satisfy the regulatory requirements.January 11, 2017 The PBC officials investigate the operations of the two largest Bitcoin exchange platforms to check whether there are anyillegal transactions on the platforms.February 9, 2017 The PBC branches at Beijing meet with nine small Bitcoin exchange platforms, demanding them to ensure that theiroperations satisfy regulatory requirements.Between liberalization and prohibition 103Confronted with the potential benefits as well as the risks of Bitcoin, the Chinesegovernment demonstrated prudent enthusiasm towards the challenges of vulnerability, volatility, and criminality.
Rather than complete prohibition, the Chineseregulators, to a large extent, tolerate the vulnerability and volatility of Bitcoin.They ban the illegal use of Bitcoin.
Yet, Chinese regulators prevent domesticfinancial institutions from conducting businesses related to Bitcoin, a clear divergence from the liberalization approach.
Consequently, China cuts off theconnections between domestic financial markets and Bitcoin, and thus seeks toreduce the potential risks for mainstream finance and investors at large.The tolerance of vulnerability and volatility of Bitcoin does not mean thatChinese regulators never encounter problems.
In early 2017, when the price ofBitcoin grew fast in a short time, the PBC actively warned major exchanges that thetransactions on their platforms might be illegal, affecting confidence and suppressing the overheated market as a result.
The Chinese government operates largely asan “invisible regulator” by functioning behind the scenes.
Its actions are mostly inthe background when the market functions well, yet intervenes directly when themarket deviates from a stable development path.
From this perspective, the Chineseregulatory policy is effective not solely because it is capable of suppressing Bitcoinprice volatility, but also because it confines the scope of influence and prevents therisks of volatility from spreading to the rest of the financial system.ConclusionWhat are the challenges that Bitcoin has brought to states? How have statesresponded to these challenges? In the spirit of the cypherpunk movement to fendoff governmental interference in individual privacy, digital currency wasdesigned to encrypt transactions and enhance trust between individuals ratherthan centralized institutions.
Through blockchain technology Bitcoin establisheda global decentralized transaction network that, for the first time, eliminated thenecessity of any centralized institutions for currency issuance and settlement.After its inception in 2009, Bitcoin grew to a $10 billion global market.However, along with growth and other potential benefits, this emergent technology also brought about three challenges: price volatility, security vulnerability,and illegal usages.How have states responded to the challenges and opportunities presented byBitcoin and blockchain technology? One view is that the development of ICTssuch as blockchain completely marginalize the governance capacities of governments and elevate those of non-state actors such as transnational enterprises,NGOs, and individuals.
The decentralized characteristics of Bitcoin and blockchain technology more generally, for instance, entail that centralized institutionssuch as central banks are no longer essential in monetary systems.
However,examining the regulatory responses of three major countries shows that centralized efforts still play important roles in the governance of the global Bitcoinnetwork.
Governments are not bystanders of the technology revolution, butactive participants in the future of emergent technologies.104  K.
Jia and F.
ZhangIn this chapter we subdivided government policy responses into three categories: liberalization, prohibition, and prudent enthusiasm.
Countries such asthe US exemplified the liberalization path.
Except regulations on illegal use ofBitcoin, the US mainly provides a laissez-faire environment for the developmentof Bitcoin.
No one is entirely forbidden from conducting business in Bitcoin.Meanwhile, countries such as Russia choose to prohibit completely the circulation of Bitcoin for fear of negatively affecting their domestic financial systems.Between these two approaches, China adopts a middle way.
It restrains only financial institutions from operating with Bitcoin and seeks to balance the potentialbenefits of the emergent technology with the possible risks of its downsides.It is difficult to conclude which approach is ultimately best given the earlyphase of blockchain technology development.
However, one provisional conclusion becomes clear: China’s policy is more flexible than what is conventionallyassumed.
As an authoritarian state, the Chinese government is considered to beconservative and slow to react to technological change compared with Westerncountries advocating free markets.
However, as our analysis shows, Chinaadopts a middle way that is neither liberalization nor complete prohibition.
TheChinese regulators cut off the path of risk transfer by forbidding financial institutions from being involved with Bitcoin, while at the same time they allow otheractors to enter the Bitcoin market under some elaborate conditions.
The policyresponse of the Chinese government has been effective until now, as China hoststhe largest Bitcoin market, which is relatively stable despite violent fluctuationsin the global Bitcoin price.Emergent technology alone might not permit developing countries to catch upwith leading developed countries.
Indeed, technology may be yet another pointof polarization in the North–South divide.
Developing countries tend to prohibitBitcoin for fear of domestic wealth fleeing through its easily accessible globalnetwork.
Yet while developed countries cannot control and manage all theimpacts of emergent technologies, they tend to enjoy their potential benefits.
Theadvent of Bitcoin and blockchain technology has been considered equivalent tothe invention of the Internet in the 1970s (Benzinga, 2015).
The Internet has provided profound benefits as well as problems over the past 50 years.
It is stillunclear what further opportunities, as well as challenges, that Bitcoin will bring.However, technology change is certain to continue provoking policy responsesfrom governments, which would benefit from understanding the case of Bitcoin.AcknowledgmentThanks to Malcolm Campbell-Verduyn for his review and constructive comments on this chapter.Notes1 Many scholars consider how Bitcoin is underlined by anarchism, or syndicalism, bothof which had a long history of revolutionary praxis.
A comprehensive overview can beBetween liberalization and prohibition 105found here: https://btctheory.com/ and https://btctheory.com/2015/03/19/revolutionarysyndicalism-bitcoin/.
See also http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-4-value-andcurrency/2 A genesis block is the first block of a blockchain.
Modern versions of Bitcoin assign itblock number 0, though older versions gave it number 1.
The genesis block is almostalways hardcoded into the software.
It is a special case in that it does not reference aprevious block, and for Bitcoin and almost all of its derivatives, it produces an unspendable subsidy.3 U.S.
Constitution, Article I, section 10.4 Although critics argue that New York State license requirements imposed unfairburdens on the emergent technology, it should be noted that the regulatory requirements are still in the direction of liberalized governance of technology, especially compared with other countries from a global perspective.
At least, the state did not prohibitany institution from conducting businesses in this field.5 See: http://bitcoincharts.com/charts/volumepie/6 There are many reasons that explain the sharp drop of Bitcoin price at that time.However, the precise time point of the intervention of the Chinese government in 2013and 2017 shows a close relationship between China and the global Bitcoin market.BibliographyAbrami, R.E., Kirby, W.C., and McFarlan, F.W.
(2014, March).
Why China can’t innovate.
Harvard Business Review.Baczynska, G.
(2014).
Russia authorities say Bitcoin illegal.
Retrieved August 23, 2017,from www.reuters.com/article/2014/02/09/us-russia-bitcoin-idUSBREA1806620140209Benzinga, L.
(2015, March 25).
Coin.co CEO: Bitcoin’s impact on society will rival theinternet.
Retrieved August 23, 2017, from http://finance.yahoo.com/news/coin-co-ceobitcoins-impact-114107872.htmlBershidsky, L.
(2013, October 4).
Goodbye Silk Road, Hello Sheep Marketplace.Bloomberg.
Retrieved August 23, 2017, from www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-10-04/goodbye-silk-road-hello-sheep-marketplace.htmlBuntinx, J.P.
(2016, March 22).
Using the blockchain for decentralized ride-sharing withLa’Zooz.
Retrieved August 23, 2017, from www.newsbtc.com/2016/03/22/usingblockchain-decentralized-ride-sharing-lazooz/Cannon, R.
(2004).
State regulatory approaches to VoIP: Policy, implementation, andoutcome.
Federal Commations Law Journal, 57: 479.CCID.
(2014).
Review of the development of the ASIC chip of Bitcoin mining machines.Retrieved August 23, 2017, from http://cpu.qudong.com/2014/0504/168553.shtmlChaum, D.
(1983).
Blind signatures for untraceable payments.
In D.
Chaum, R.L.
Rivest,and A.T.
Sherman (eds.) Advances in cryptology (pp.
199–203).
New York:Springer US.Christin, N.
(2013, May).
Traveling the Silk Road: A measurement analysis of a largeanonymous online marketplace.
In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conferenceon World Wide Web (pp.
213–24).
New York: ACM.Coldewey, D.
(2012).
$250,000 worth of Bitcoins stolen in net heist.
NBC.
RetrievedAugust 23, 2017, from www.nbcnews.com/technology/250-000-worth-bitcoins-stolennet-heist-980871Coleman, L.
(2016).
China’s mining dominance: Good or bad for Bitcoin? CryptocoinsNews.
Retrieved August 23, 2017, from www.cryptocoinsnews.com/chinas-miningdominance-good-or-bad-for-bitcoin/106 K.
Jia and F.
ZhangDe Filippi, P., and Loveluck, B.
(2016, September 30).
The invisible politics of Bitcoin:Governance crisis of a decentralized infrastructure.
Internet Policy Review.de Geus, M.
(2014).
Peter Kropotkin’s anarchist vision of organization.
Ephemera,14(4): 859.Extance, A.
(2015).
The future of cryptocurrencies: Bitcoin and beyond.
Nature, 30September.Fan, Y.
(2016).
Zhong Guo Fa Ding Shu Zi Huo Bi de Li Lun Yi Ju he Jia Gou Xuan Ze(The theoretical basis and structure choice of Chinese fiat digital currency).
ChinaFinance, (17): 10–12.Farrell, M.
(2013).
Strategist predicts end of Bitcoin.
Retrieved August 23, 2017, fromhttp://money.cnn.com/2013/05/14/investing/bremmer-bitcoin/index.htmlFCC.
(2011).
FCC’s VoIP regulation dilemma.
Retrieved August 23, 2017, from www.telephonyyourway.com/2011/04/30/fccs-voip-regulation-dilemma/Feenberg, A.
(2012).
Questioning technology.
London: Routledge.FinCen.
(2013).
US Department of Treasury, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network,“Application of FinCEN’s Regulations to Persons Administering, Exchanging, orUsing Virtual Currencies” (Guidance FIN-2013-G001, March 18, 2013).
RetrievedAugust 17, 2016, from www.fincen.gov/statutes_regs/guidance/html/FIN-2013-G001.htmlFoster, J.B., and McChesney, R.W.
(2014).
Surveillance capitalism: Monopoly-financecapital, the military-industrial complex, and the digital age.
Monthly Review, 66(3): 1.Franco, P.
(2014).
Understanding Bitcoin: Cryptography, engineering and economics.Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.Gasser, U., Budish, R., and West, S.M.
(2015, January 15).
Multistakeholder as governance groups: Observations from case studies.
Cambridge, MA: Berkman Klein Center,Harvard University.Gilpin, R.
(1975).
Three models of the future.
International Organization, 29(1): 37–60.Hayek, F.A.
(1945).
The use of knowledge in society.
American Economic Review, 519–30.Hughes, E.
(1993).
A cypherpunk’s manifesto.
Retrieved August 23, 2017, from www.activism.net/cypherpunk/manifesto.htmlHutt, R.
(2016, December 13).
Beyond bitcoin: Four surprising uses for blockchain.World Economic Forum.Jonathan, M.
(2013).
Bitcoin market cap breaks $10 billion.
Retrieved August 23, 2017,from http://coinalert.eu/2015013630-Bitcoin+Market+Cap+Breaks+10+Billion.htmlKaminsky, D.
(2013).
I tried hacking Bitcoin and I failed.
Retrieved August 23, 2017,from www.businessinsider.com/dan-kaminsky-highlights-flaws-bitcoin-2013-4Kenney, M., and Zysman, J.
(2016).
The rise of the platform economy.
Issues in Scienceand Technology, 32(3): 61.Kostakis, V., and Giotitsas, C.
(2017, January 8).
Beyond Bitcoin: Is Bitcoin a misguidedinformation technology tool here to create more problems than it solves? Evonomics.Kropotkin, P.A., and Baldwin, R.N.
(1970).
Kropotkin’s revolutionary pamphlets: A collection of writings.
Mineola, NY: Dover Publications.Kurzweil, R.
(2005).
The singularity is near: When humans transcend biology.
London:Penguin.Lahrichi, K.
(2016).
Growing number of Venezuelans trade bolivars for bitcoins to buynecessities.
Guardian.
Retrieved August 23, 2017, from www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/venezuela-bitcoin-economy-digital-currency-bolivarsLazanis, R.
(2015).
How technology behind Bitcoin could transform accounting as weknow it.
Retrieved August 23, 2017, from https://techvibes.com/2015/01/22/howtechnology-behind-bitcoin-could-transform-accounting-as-we-know-it-2015-01-22Between liberalization and prohibition 107Li, D.
(2013).
The US/EU regulation enlightenment to China.
Journal of Beijing Instituteof Economic Management, 28(4): 30–3.Liu.
(2016).
PBC confirms to issue digital currency.
Retrieved August 23, 2017, fromhttp://finance.sina.com.cn/roll/2016-01-22/doc-ifxnvhvu6975097.shtmlLombardo, H.
(2015).
Hong Kong gov says Bitcoin regulation unneeded, highly speculative and not currency.
Retrieved August 23, 2017, from http://allcoinsnews.com/2015/03/25/hong-kong-government-bitcoin-regulation-unnecessary-warns-highlyspeculative-not-lawful-tender/Mac, R.
(2013).
False alarm: Silk Road competitor Black Market Reloaded stayingonline.
Retrieved August 23, 2017, from www.forbes.com/sites/ryanmac/2013/10/18/false-alarm-silk-road-competitor-black-market-reloaded-staying-online/Matthewman, S.
(2011).
Technology and social theory.
London: Palgrave Macmillan.May, C.
(2013).
The global political economy of intellectual property rights: The newenclosures? London: Routledge.Mayer, M., Carpes, M., and Knoblich, R.
(eds.) (2014).
The global politics of science andtechnology – Vol.
1: Concepts from international relations and other disciplines.
NewYork: Springer.Mayer, M., Carpes, M., and Knoblich, R.
(eds.) (2014).
The global politics of science andtechnology – Vol.
2: Perspectives, cases and methods.
New York: Springer.Nakamoto, S.
(2008).
Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system.
Retrieved August21, 2017 from https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdfPBC.
(2016).
People’s Bank of China holds seminar on digital currency in Beijing.Retrieved August 23, 2017, from www.pbc.gov.cn/goutongjiaoliu/113456/113469/3008070/index.htmlPBC.
(2014).
2013 Nian Zhong Guo Ren Min Yin Hang Gui Zhang Ji Zhong Yao GuiFan Xing Wen Jian Jie Du (Explanations of the rules and important normative documents of People’s Bank of China in 2013).
Beijing: China Financial PublishingHouse.Pielke, R., Wigley, T., and Green, C.
(2008).
Dangerous assumptions.
Nature, 452(7187):531–32.Raczynkski, J.
(2016).
How might blockchain technology revolutionize the legal industry? Thomson Reuters.
Retrieved August 23, 2017, from https://blogs.thomsonreuters.com/answerson/might-blockchain-technology-revolutionize-legal-industry/Rizzo, P.
(2015).
Russian lawmaker: Bitcoin is a CIA conspiracy.
Retrieved August 23,2017, from www.coindesk.com/russian-politician-us-bitcoin-finance-terrorism/Rosenau, J.N., and Singh, J.P.
(2002).
Information technologies and global politics: Thechanging scope of power and governance.
New York: SUNY Press.Rosov, S.
(2015).
Beyond Bitcoin.
CFA Institute Magazine, 26(1).Ruggie, J.G.
(1975).
International responses to technology: concepts and trends.
International Organization, 29(3): 557–83.Salmon, F.
(2013).
The Bitcoin bubble and the future of currency.
Retrieved August 23,2017, from https://medium.com/money-banking/2b5ef79482cbSchatsky, D., and Muraskin, C.
(2015).
Beyond Bitcoin: Blockchain is coming to disruptyour industry.
New York: Deloitte University Press.Singleton, R.
(2008).
Knowledge and technology: The basis of wealth and power.
In D.Balaam and M.
Vesath (eds.) Introduction to international political economy.
4th ed.(pp.
196–214).
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.Tillet, A., and Lesser, B.
(2014).
Science and technology in central and eastern Europe:The reform of higher education.
London: Routledge.108  K.
Jia and F.
Zhangvan Wirdum, A.
(2016).
New EU directive may impose anti-money laundering regulations on Bitcoin wallet providers.
Bitcoin Magazine.
Retrieved August 23, 2017, fromhttps://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/new-eu-directive-may-impose-anti-moneylaundering-regulations-on-bitcoin-wallet-providers-1468424029/Vodovnik, Ž.
(2013).
A living spirit of revolt: The infrapolitics of anarchism.
Oakland,CA: PM Press.Wachhaus, A.
(2014).
Governance beyond government.
Administration and Society,46(5): 573–93.Wang, K., and Safavi, A.
(2016).
Blockchain is empowering the future of insurance.Retrieved August 23, 2017, from https://techcrunch.com/2016/10/29/blockchain-isempowering-the-future-of-insurance/Wharton.
(2016).
How blockchain technology will disrupt financial services firms.Retrieved August 23, 2017, from http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/blockchain-technology-will-disrupt-financial-services-firms/Whittaker, Z.
(2015).
Bitstamp exchange hacked, $5m worth of Bitcoin stolen.
RetrievedAugust 23, 2017, from www.zdnet.com/article/bitstamp-bitcoin-exchange-suspendedamid-hack-concerns-heres-what-we-know/Willcocks, L.P.
(2006).
Michel Foucault in the social study of ICTs: Critique and reappraisal.
Social Science Computer Review, 24(3): 274–95.Young, J.
(2016).
Why Bitcoin continues to become increasingly popular.
RetrievedAugust 23, 2017, from www.newsbtc.com/2016/02/27/bitcoin-continues-becomeincreasingly-popular/Zhang, L.
(2013).
The Google-China dispute: The Chinese national narrative and rhetorical legitimation of the Chinese Communist Party.
Rhetoric Review, 32(4): 455–72.Zhou, Y.
(2017).
CBC criticized Bitcoin exchanges to loan money to users illegally.Retrieved August 23, 2017, from www.thepaper.cn/newsDetail_forward_16039646 Cryptocurrencies and digitalpayment rails in networked globalgovernancePerspectives on inclusion andinnovationDaivi Rodima-Taylor and William W.
GrimesOver two billion people live outside the formal financial sector.
Digital financialinclusion has emerged as a novel paradigm to enhance access to financial services through e-currency platforms in many emerging economies.
These processes started with the “mobile money revolution” in Africa and Asia a fewyears ago, transforming the way people transferred money in domestic andregional settings.
Cryptocurrencies present a promise to build on that digitalinclusion revolution by disrupting global remittance systems – cross-border andtransnational person-to-person money transfers.These are important developments both practically and theoretically.
Practically, digital financial inclusion will likely be the way in which hundreds of millions, or even billions, of “unbanked” people interact with formal financial andregulatory systems.
Theoretically, the examination of digital financial inclusionprovides a novel – and likely revealing – lens for investigating the effects of thenovel peer-to-peer digital payment infrastructures on agency, participation, andauthority.
In this chapter, we contend that the growing employment of digitalmoney transfer circuits for remittance transfers profoundly affects their regulatory and normative conceptualizations, and has important implications for theglobal governance as well as broader legitimation of digital currencies.
Arguingthat crypto-remittances and mobile money transfers can facilitate a paradigmchange in financial inclusion, the discussion highlights the novel dynamics of thecommunicative networks and local innovation ecosystems where the moneytransfers circulate.Digital financial services in developing countries provide the essential butoften missing infrastructures of finance, enabling many people to access formalfinancial services for the first time in their lives.
In many communities, the poorlive in a cash economy and engage mostly in informal economic activities.Emerging markets currently represent 75 percent of the world’s 4.8 billionmobile subscribers (Bayen and Ajadi, 2017).
Novel mobile-phone-based digitalfinancial services have been launched in more than 80 countries worldwide(GSMA, 2014), enabling the poor to transition to electronically mediated financial services and connect to formal financial institutions.
The new digital rails in110  D.
Rodima-Taylor and W.W.
Grimeslow-income communities are used predominantly for person-to-person paymentsor remittances, both domestic and international.
Payments are the “connectivetissue of an economic system” (Radcliffe and Voorhies, 2012) and remittancesoften serve as an important entry point to the formal financial system in cashbased economies.While e-money transferred through mobile platforms has significantlyreduced the costs of money transfers within countries, money transfer fees in thetraditional cross-border remittance industry remain extremely high.
Digital currencies such as Bitcoin appear particularly suitable for migrant workers’ remittances that are relatively small in size.
Remittance transfers to the poorest areasin the world often tend to be the costliest.
As of 2014, the global cost of sending$200 averaged at around 8 percent of the sum sent, whereas the costs of sendingremittances to Africa remained close to almost 12 percent and as high as 30percent in some remittance corridors (World Bank, 2016).
The United Nation’sSustainable Development Goals call for a reduction of the migrant remittancestransaction costs to less than 3 percent by 2030, and eliminating remittances corridors where transfer costs are higher than 5 percent.
While this seems unrealistic under current institutional and legal conditions, digital currency offers onepossible solution.Hundreds of millions of people now live outside their countries of birth, andthe recent global refugee crisis has resulted in further mass displacement.
Thecontexts of forced migration and violent conflict have been shown to oftenproduce enhanced remittance flows, but remittance transfers to fragile countriesare among the costliest and most difficult (Rodima-Taylor, 2013).
Meanwhile,recent “de-risking” initiatives1 by global banks have re-marginalized manymoney transfer operators and correspondent banks in poor and conflict-affectedstates, pushing remittance flows further underground.Blockchain applications have made possible a conceptually novel approach tosending and receiving migrant remittances that includes new digital forms ofmoney, novel payment infrastructures, and new types of remittance actors.
Thetechnology facilitates decentralized systems of trust and secure financial transactions: as an immutable and time-stamped public ledger, it provides a permanent record of money transmissions.
Bitcoin as a global decentralized currencyholds a promise to facilitate direct and transparent cross-border remittance transfers, theoretically eliminating intermediaries such as correspondent banks of traditional remittance systems.
The technology is also suitable for micropayments– the sums regularly transacted can be small in many developing economies(Realini and Mehta, 2015).
Cryptocurrencies can therefore contribute towardsmore efficient remittance systems and enhance financial inclusion, particularly ineconomies with inefficient payment systems and underdeveloped infrastructuresof traditional finance.We build our analysis using both emerging theoretical approaches to infrastructures and ethnographic research.
In this respect, we seek to lay the groundwork for future work by researchers in both political economy and economicanthropology.
The chapter begins by examining the emergence of the digitalCryptocurrencies and digital payment rails  111financial inclusion paradigm, including the role of new communicative technologies in facilitating inclusive innovation practices.
Next, it examines the “mobilemoney revolution” in East Africa, exploring in particular the central role of localpractices of money management and user innovations in the success of thatdigital finance initiative.
Building on the analysis of the impact of mobile money,it considers emerging practices of person-to-person payments based on blockchain technologies in developing economies.
The chapter next examines the conceptually novel approaches to sending and receiving migrant remittances madepossible by the blockchain technology, which include new digital forms ofmoney, novel payment infrastructures, and new types of remittance actors suchas fintech start-ups and other non-bank financial service providers.
It demonstrates that the social meaning attached to actual financial practice helps to illuminate the broader impact of the digital financial technologies as they movethrough the material and human infrastructures.Digital financial inclusion: towards “platformization”of financial innovationFinancial inclusion is increasingly emerging as both a development policyconcern as well as a market opportunity for industry players in global finance.Traditionally defined by access to the formal banking system, the meaning offinancial inclusion has been transformed by new technologies that offer financialfunctions at extremely low cost.
There is an increasing recognition of the relevance of diverse institutions as players in financial inclusion, including variousnon-bank and non-financial institutions, as well as the informal sector.
We nowunderstand financial inclusion as occurring within a broader, interconnected financial ecosystem “of market actors and infrastructure needed for safe and efficient product delivery for the poor” (Ledgerwood, 2013).
The concept offinancial inclusion has been increasingly intertwined with the notions of innovation, interconnectedness, and institutional diversity in the recent developmentdiscourse.
The Group of Twenty (G20) recently highlighted the role of financialinclusion in moving “towards an Innovative, Interconnected and Inclusive WorldEconomy” (Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion, 2016), while affirmingits commitment to assist the low-income developing countries in leveragingdigital financial inclusion towards advancing the UN 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda.This chapter contributes to conceptualizing the novel dynamic of financialinclusion that occurs with the growing role of technology in the circulation ofcredit in global finance.
By involving masses of the global “unbanked” in novelfinancial access structures, digital financial inclusion has a potential to introducenew forms of disempowerment and marginality.
Modern technology and theemerging “fintech–philanthrophy–development complex” that guides digital financial inclusion initiatives can facilitate novel opportunities for accumulationand exploitation through the use of digital financial access and data (Gabor andBrooks, 2017: 2).
Gabor and Brooks contend that this new form of “financialized112  D.
Rodima-Taylor and W.W.
Grimesinclusion” of the global unbanked that is based on digital footprints can be usedby states to render populations “legible” as well as generate financial assets forthe emerging “digital elite” with little involvement from official developmentactors and actual consumers.
Bernards (2016: 2) suggests attention to the “organization and forms of financial practice” and relevant political and institutionaldimensions that emerge in local political struggles of the post-colony.
Globalregulatory projects such as financial inclusion are enacted in local spaces througharticulation of a “complex network of local organizations, non-governmentalorganizations, international organizations and state institutions” (ibid.: 9) anddefined by ambiguities between private and public interests, profit and socialprotection agendas.
This also implies attention to the interaction of financialinclusion frameworks with the emerging economic informality.We argue that the analysis of the impact and new connections emerging withspreading digital financial inclusion should consider a broad set of practices andactors involved in their actualization and governance.
The social field of digitalfinancial inclusion has been conceptualized as a “global assemblage of subjects,technics and rationalities that aim to develop poor-appropriate financial productsand services” (Schwittay, 2011: 381), with attention at how diverse material,normative, and institutional elements “constitute a technical field fit to be governed and improved” (Li, 2007: 286).
The assemblage approach to developmentinterventions highlights the issue of agency – as exploring the work of situatedsubjects who “pull together” disparate elements “from an existing repertoire, amatter of habit, accretion, and bricolage” (ibid.: 265).
Schwittay suggests moreattention to “culturally grounded monetary practices and logics” (ibid.: 381) toovercome the quantitative focus on measuring impact and producing accountability, and to illuminate the growing tensions between the social mission of financial inclusion enterprise and the private accumulation logic of industry players(ibid.: 393).These dilemmas are characteristic of the current era of global governance thatis shaped by an increasing disaggregation of global political and regulatory processes, but also new opportunities for forging connections that redefine andexpand the autonomy and sovereignty of individual actors.
Slaughter (2004) suggests that the emerging global networks of regulators and legislators are leadingtowards a novel type of “networked world order” where sovereignty is “relational rather than insular” (ibid.: 188).
This “disaggregated sovereignty” in theinternational system of government networks reaches beyond traditional autonomy and interdependence of various national and supranational entities, involving new types of connections defined by participation and agency – “the politicalability to be an actor” within the networked order (ibid.: 187).The rise of these novel nodes of connection highlights the intersectionbetween new technologies and agency.
Discussing the dimensions of technological emergence that are relevant for informed policy-making and governance,Rotolo, Hicks and Martin (2015) point out the need to incorporate qualitativeresearch on human agency and “niche-regime dynamics” (see Chapter 1 of thisvolume for more discussion on emerging technologies).2 As these technologiesCryptocurrencies and digital payment rails  113are characterized by uncertainty and ambiguity – regarding their future impact aswell as meanings and importance attributed to them by different social groups –scientometric approaches produce only limited effectiveness (ibid.).
This callsfor a study of local practices and systems of inclusive innovation that occur inthe contexts of spreading digital finance.
The notion of “local innovation ecosystems” (Toivanen et al., 2012) entails viewing new technology infrastructuresand the material aspects of technology diffusion in a dynamic interplay withlocal human and social resources.
Driven by interactive learning and experimentation – “co-creation” and cooperation between different types of actors (ibid.:12) – these ecosystems incorporate important social and cultural elements.Digital financial initiatives are increasingly shaped by the financial technology (fintech) sector, which has effected profound changes in the financialindustry landscape, particularly in emerging markets.
The industry is disruptedand transformed by novel business models and partnerships.
The emergence offintech is accompanied by a disaggregation of various financial services andproducts from the traditional banking sector, but also new ways of consolidating and channeling these along new digital pathways.
Particularly in developing countries, mobile platforms are increasingly consolidating payments,lending, investment, and micro-insurance services.
This chapter argues thatdigital currencies are instrumental in the novel modes of platformization ofglobal payment rails that increasingly shape financial services in low-incomecommunities.Digital financial platforms carry a powerful potential to integrate other actorsand institutions in the predominantly cash economies of developing countries(see Kendall et al., 2012).
Kendall et al.
argue that mobile money platformsfunction as a network infrastructure that facilitates new forms of moving goodsand services and new ways of integrating actors.
Similarly to other ICT-basedplatforms, such as the Internet, they provide existing financial actors with newopportunities to “stimulate innovation and change existing business models,” aswell as “radically reconfigure how retail finance is done in developing countries”(ibid.: 49).
By facilitating the exchange of cash and electronic value betweendiverse sets of actors, mobile money platforms become a novel type of communicative network with potential to affect and transform the financial system aswell as a country’s economy.A novel ecosystem emerged around the mobile money platform in Kenya thatincludes both established financial institutions as well as innovative startups,ranging from “traditional banks, savings and credit cooperatives (SACCOs), andinsurance providers to newer mobile-based credit, insurance and mobile savingsofferings” (Kendall et al., 2012: 52).
Mobile money has also given rise to newinitiatives that provide connections between the established players and thedigital currency platform.
Kendall et al.
pinpoint three types of engagement:“integrators” who add the electronic money channel to existing products; “innovators” who launch new products or ventures around mobile-money-basedmodels; and “bridge builders” who create connections of mobile money platforms to financial and payment services.3 This “platformization” of the financial114  D.
Rodima-Taylor and W.W.
Grimesenvironment highlights the catalytic powers of digital currencies and e-money tofacilitate institutional integration in the Global South.
It is particularly importantto investigate the impact of the emerging connective nodes to the changing configurations of power and agency on local as well as global scales.The emergence of digital technologies that reshape financial services andaccess infrastructures poses novel challenges to consumers as well as regulators.A new model of global governance of financial inclusion was outlined in theG20 Financial Inclusion Action Plan (FIAP), which emphasizes the need tointegrate financial inclusion in the activities of global standard-setting bodies4and “increase understanding of the interdependence of financial inclusion,stability, integrity, and consumer protection” (GPFI, 2016: 6).
As digital modesof financial inclusion involve a radical change in customer and financial data useand handling, data protection is critical.
The complex digital technology platforms combine with a pervasive unfamiliarity of the low-income customers withthe formal financial sector and customer rights (Lauer and Lyman, 2015).
Customer concerns around digital finance platforms include the lack of transparencyregarding fees and terms, poor customer recourse, and inadequate data protection (Zimmerman and Baur, 2015).
Addressing these risks remains crucial, asthe livelihoods of many low-income consumers involve chronic instability.
Therecent White Paper of the Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI,2016) calls for a coordinated collaboration between the global standard-settingbodies (SSBs) and country-based regulators in exploring challenges to financialdata security, and the development of guidelines for financial technology companies.
It also highlights some opportunities of blockchain applications forenhancing financial data protection and customer privacy.Disrupting financial inclusion in East Africa: amplifyingnetworks through mobile money platformsIn East Africa, traditional bank-based notions of financial inclusion have beenlargely superseded by the development of client-driven mobile money networks.While enabled by technology and services provided by large-scale telecom andIT hardware companies, it has been the actual practices of households and individuals – in many cases using mobile technologies to build on existing socialpractices and cultural norms – that have led to widespread access to core financial services (payments, credit, and savings).
While these practices began largelyoutside the banking system, banks are now also using mobile money to providelower-cost financial services, thus improving the opportunities for householdsthat previously found the costs and practical challenges associated with brickand-mortar banks to be daunting.
In this section, we focus on the successfuladoption of mobile-money-based financial inclusion in Kenya; similar storiescan be told elsewhere, with other well-documented cases including Uganda andTanzania.
We contend that reflection on the successes and challenges of theadoption of mobile money – a form of digital finance that has rapidly becomeubiquitous in many unbanked areas of the Global South – illuminates the potentialCryptocurrencies and digital payment rails  115role of cryptocurrencies in facilitating cross-border remittances and broadeningfinancial inclusion in the developing world.M-Pesa is one of the first and most successful mobile money initiatives in EastAfrica, and its inception and continued evolution provide instructive insights intothe dynamics of digital financial networks and inclusive innovation in the GlobalSouth.
M-Pesa is a system for small-scale electronic payment and store of value(up to $500) that is accessible through a simple feature phone.
Customers cantransfer money to other users, pay bills, and purchase mobile airtime credit byusing text messages (SMS).
There is a flat fee for most transactions.
It is significant that Kenya’s mobile money system was inspired by a local payment innovation – with the rise of mobile phones, people started forwarding pre-paid airtime toeach other as currency.5 The recipient could use it for calling, utilize it as credit atthe local store, or turn it into cash by informal means (Maurer, 2015).
M-Pesa ismostly used for person-to-person money transfers – Kenyan mobile-phone-baseddomestic remittances are triple of those in sub-Saharan Africa (Rosengard, 2016:11).
Other functions include retail payments for goods and agricultural services,receiving salaries and government funds, payment of utilities, as well as emergingsavings and credit products that utilize the mobile money platform (e.g.,M-Shwari).
In 2015, M-Pesa had over 19 million subscribers in Kenya, with dailytransactions of $150 million (Ochieng, 2016).
M-Pesa has significantly impactedfinancial inclusion in the country – in ten years, from 2006–15, the number ofadults using formal financial services almost tripled, rising from 27 percent to 75percent (FinAccess, 2016).The market success of M-Pesa has been attributed to certain economic, social,demographic, and regulatory conditions, but also to effective design and strategythat helped the platform scale up rapidly (Mas and Radcliffe, 2010).
M-Pesa hasmanaged to effectively balance regulation, financial inclusion, and innovation,without threatening the country’s financial stability (Ndungu, 2017).
It capitalizes on a flexible collaboration between the main actors of the mobile moneyecosystem that included banks, telecommunications and fintech companies,regulators, as well as retail agents and consumers.
At the time of the inception ofthe M-Pesa platform in 2007, its executor, Safaricom, held a dominant positionin the country’s telecommunications sector (with a 73 percent market share) anddid not have to coordinate with other providers for interoperability (Rosengard,2016).
The Bank of Kenya was open to the experimentation by Safaricom withmobile financial access models, exempting the new mobile money platform fromstringent KYC/AML rules and branch banking requirements with higher operation costs (Rosengard, 2016).
Money transfers between individuals as well asinstitutional payments benefited from the 2006 Kenyan government legislativeamendment to the communication law to “recognize electronic units of money”(Ndungu, 2017: 49).
In the absence of the national payments and settlement law,the mobile money platform developed through the practicality of transactionsand broader public acceptance of the service.
The regulators also encouragedbanking intermediation around M-Pesa virtual savings accounts, and crossborder remittances and payments were facilitated by appropriate provisions in116  D.
Rodima-Taylor and W.W.
Grimesthe National Payments Act (ibid.).
At the same time, the Bank of Kenya provided adequate measures of protection to consumers and the national paymentssystem – by addressing cybersecurity concerns, establishing appropriate KYCmeasures in the form of national identity cards, and stipulating depositing of customer funds in prudentially regulated institutions (Rosengard, 2016).Despite the unprecedented success in Kenya of M-Pesa’s mobile moneysystem, its telecom-led mobile banking model (“new products via existingdelivery channels”) is facing new competition from Airtel Money, a bank-ledservice (“existing products via new delivery channels”) offered by Kenya’sEquity Bank (Rosengard, 2016: 16).6 Dynamic partnerships between banks andnon-banks in Kenya are continuing at the present moment, as the KenyanBankers Association announced in February 2017 the planned launch ofPesaLink, a banking-industry-based mobile money transfer platform that linkscustomers’ bank accounts via M-Pesa infrastructures.7There is an increasing recognition that the rapid progress of mobile moneytransfer services in Africa has been facilitated by the central importance ofinformal credit networks in developing economies.
Through its person-to-personmoney transfers, M-Pesa tapped into informal networks of mutuality and financial security – a market that was previously handled “through personal trips,friends, and public transport networks” (Mas and Radcliffe, 2010: 5).
A largepart of these transactions represented various reciprocal transfers within networks of relatives, friends, and business associates that functioned as mutualinsurance.
Mobile money services link into existing cycles and networks of reciprocity, rather than one-way money transfers or remittances (Jack et al., 2013:357).
Mobile money systems allow their users fuller integration with existingfinancial systems – which do not include just the formal sector – and expandtheir circle of debt and credit partners and networks of mutual obligations.
Insum, mobile money has been empowering for East African households, bydecreasing the cost of payments and remittances within existing networks andimproving their efficiency, as well as opening up new opportunities to expandthese networks.
As Mas and Radcliffe suggest, the mobile money experience inKenya could therefore highlight an alternative approach to financial inclusion ascompared with the traditional credit- or savings-led model – the initial focus inlow-income communities could be on establishing the “payment rails” for abroader set of financial services.Digital finance in Africa building on local financial practicesThe East African mobile money initiatives owe much of their success to theirclose correspondence to people’s financial practices and money managementneeds.
Studies of Kenyan low-income households highlight the unstable natureof household income and pivotal importance of remittances from social networks.
The 2014 Kenyan Financial Diaries study8 indicates that such externalresources comprised 25 percent of the household total income and were particularly important for women (Zollmann, 2014: iv).
Mobile money transfers fromCryptocurrencies and digital payment rails  117male migrant workers in Kenyan urban areas had a positive impact on theincome of rural households as well as on women’s empowerment (Morawczynski and Pickens, 2009).9 Customers appreciated that the M-Pesa service enabledthem to store small amounts of money10 for daily consumption as well as emergencies (ibid.: 3).
Negotiating credit at retail shops, market stalls, schools, hospitals, and diverse local savings groups was widespread (Zollmann, 2014: 11).Strategies to increase liquidity and gain credit centered around people’s socialnetworks and informal savings–credit groups.
Not surprisingly, the main function of mobile money became mediating remittance transfers from other regions,but also moving money within local social networks.
Morawczynski and Pickensindicate that M-Pesa money transfers in their relatively early stages already substantially increased money flows in Kenya, particularly in rural areas.
Mobilemoney spread through the network effect of users and remitters once its effectsto increased income inflows were understood.These studies show that the adoption of digital finance is dependent on localpractices and concepts of savings and debt.
Mobile money taps into the relationships of mutuality that are central in the fiduciary culture among low-incomeKenyans.
While people relate to the oligopolistic formal banking sector on amore hierarchical basis, informal financial groups operate on the basis of equality (Johnson, 2014: 17).
Mobile money transfers capitalize on long-term relationships of reciprocity that often function based on delayed returns.
It providesmore opportunities for risk-sharing among social networks, facilitating increasingly open-ended and diverse connections (ibid.: 18).An important feature of these informal debt networks is their flexibility andnegotiability (Johnson, 2014).
Social networks have historically constituted animportant avenue of resource access in African communities, where productionand resource access have been plagued by chronic uncertainties (Berry, 1995).New opportunities that the money economy has brought have expanded thatinstitutional diversity: “monetization has often been accompanied by the preservation or even multiplication of local institutions for obtaining credit or managing savings” (Berry, 1995: 309, in Rodima-Taylor, 2014).
Mobile moneyserves to facilitate a further expansion of existing networks of mutuality that arecentral to local economies.11Rodima-Taylor (2014) argues that there has been a recent rise in informal financial groups in African communities, and these institutions entail an apparentparadox of cooperation and sharing that occurs inside the expansion of moneyeconomy.
The groups are seen as “hybrid organizational forms” that combinetraditional as well as modern values, organizational templates, and resources,and where fragmented elements of formalization co-mingle with customary andkin-based norms and idioms (Rodima-Taylor, 2014).
Although outwardly focusing on the egalitarian and peer-oriented dimensions of the collective activities,the groups also encouraged individual accumulation and advancement.
As suchlocal financial institutions and practices therefore entail a hybridity between theformal and informal, they challenge the conceptualization of financial inclusionas inevitable movement towards greater formalization and regulation.
Instead,118  D.
Rodima-Taylor and W.W.
Grimesmore attention is called to the interplay between local financial forms and practices, and the new institutions and technologies of spreading digital finance.The mutual learning and experimentation characteristic to these new networksinvolves an increasingly diverse set of local and global actors – “mobile moneyprofessionals” that include people and organizations from diverse industries –development experts, researchers and programmers, investors, businesspeopleand startup founders, NGO staff, regulators and policy-makers (Maurer, Nelms,and Rea, 2013: 53).12 The role and functioning of local mobile money retailagents can be particularly illustrative of the dynamic of power and innovationoccurring in these communicative networks.
The agents – who serve as “cash-in/cash-out points” and mediate the “last mile” access as local shop-keepers orkiosk operators – represent the “human face” of the network (ibid.: 55).
Theyuse their social knowledge to manage and recruit clients, while simultaneouslyalso representing banks, mobile network operators and regulators – thereby combining both mediating (transformative) and intermediary (acting on behalf ofsomeone else) functions (ibid.; see also Latour, 2005).
The agents exemplify thenon-hierarchical dynamics of the network, but also the ambiguities it creates foragency and representation.
Increasingly based on relationships between multipleactors, power and agency in the network are diffuse but more situational andpolitically motivated.The emerging communicative infrastructures also facilitate changes in themeanings of money and payments by establishing new connections and relationships.
Instead of consuming the product of mobile money, its users activelymodify and remake this technology – for example, when using airtime minutesas money (Maurer, 2012).
These increasing ambiguities about the nature ofagency as well as money could end the “state monopolization of the means ofexchange” and lead to the “democratization of the form and process of money asan open-ended, ongoing, socio-technical experiment” (ibid.: 592), as well asalter the form and process of financial inclusion.
The new payments space isthereby characterized by “user-driven innovations” of a specific character,ensuing from the capacity of communication technologies to involve “an activestate of readiness to forge new relations” (ibid.: 590).
The study of the operationof money in these novel digital structures also calls more attention to the functioning of money as a means of payment – not merely as a neutral and depersonalized medium of exchange separate from its social context (Maurer, 2015).
Newpayment technologies such as mobile money and cryptocurrencies can revealnew perspectives about money and its different roles and forms.Blockchain technology: implications for trust, governance,and monetary pragmaticsThe rapid diffusion of mobile money in East Africa suggests that developingeconomies are ripe targets for digital currencies as well.
Just as mobile protocolswere able to circumvent the existing challenges to financial inclusion by lowering transaction costs and speeding access, digital currencies appear to be wellCryptocurrencies and digital payment rails  119configured to solve additional challenges or to further drive down cost curves.
Inparticular, digital currencies such as Bitcoin may be able to reduce concernsabout abuse of market power by fintech monopolies or lower-level fraud, whilealso eliminating barriers and inefficiencies in cross-border transactions.This chapter argues that the monetary innovation of Bitcoin involves noveltechnologies and infrastructures and new conceptualizations of money and valuethat elicit new forms of cooperation and collective action.
Blockchain technologies promise solutions to the growing problems of public distrust with traditionalfinancial institutions and transactions.
In the blockchain-empowered system,where the traditional coupling of fiat with digital forms of bank credits anddebits has been replaced by cryptocurrency, the database of transactions isshared by a network of autonomous computers and enables a novel and transparent approach to recording transactions and verifying information – a “trustless”and decentralized transaction system.
Historical changes in trust-bearing andledger-keeping institutions – from barter to digital finance – have shown us howsystems of trust redefine tokens of money as mediums of exchange as well asstores of value (Casey and Dahan, 2016).13 The novel decentralized trust protocols bring about changes not only in ledgers and record-keeping, but also in contract – the two “central legal devices of the modernity” (DuPont and Maurer,2015: 4).
The authors assert a connection between the systems of record keepingand modes of governance.14 The new digital contracts as “self-executing law-likeservices” are managed and enforced without human intervention, altering thenature of social contracts as negotiable and grounded in uncertainty: in cryptocontracts, code replaces law (ibid.).A blockchain-based system of self-executing contracts would therefore havepotential to facilitate novel decentralized and participatory organizations andsystems of governance.
Wright and De Filippi (2015: 3) contend that blockchainapplications would allow eliminating the regulatory and administrative “middlemen” and lead to novel participatory governance systems that can replicate “thebenefits of the formal corporate structures, while at the same time maintainingthe flexibility and scale of informal online groups.” The new digital currencypromises its followers both material and social values; the strengthening of theautonomy of the individual as well as a new peer-based community.The practical effects of blockhain-based networks can be illustrated by analyzing how value is produced and distributed in the new peer-to-peer transfers(Mallard et al., 2014; Maurer, Nelms, and Swartz, 2013).
Bitcoin occupies anambiguous position between “commodity money” – currency as a materialdevice that has an intrinsic value – and “credit money,” where currency is aseries of mutually accepted debts.
It aims to break with the centralized lendingauthorities and their chains of guarantors, which are credit money features(Mallard et al., 2014: 6–7).
At the same time, the monetary value of Bitcoin isalso subject to the trust of its adherents in the decentralized community peers,affording it with credit aspects.
Maurer et al.
(2013: 263) indicate that this trustis embedded in the crypto-protocol, allowing for a peculiar combination of a“practical materialism” of Bitcoin with a “politics of community and trust.” The120  D.
Rodima-Taylor and W.W.
Grimesauthors contend that a dynamic dialectic between commodity money and creditmoney defines the essence of Bitcoin.
The new evolving monetary pragmatics isgrounded in trust embedded in technical code, but also shared among individualsusing the system, and dependent on multiple infrastructures and institutionsinvolved in its functioning.Mallard et al.
(2014: 2) point out that the emergence of trust in such systemsoccurs “through interactions between actors and technologies, transactions, discourses and debates, in several arenas ranging from governance to social interaction and technology implementation.” While conventional networks are basedon chains of belonging and cooperation, heterogenous networks also incorporatematerial and ideational elements that allow attention to the points in the web ofactors where important connections are revealed and value conversions occur(Rodima-Taylor, 2016).Bitcoin, remittances, and growing global mobilityThis spatial and temporal heterogeneity of the novel digital ledger applicationsthat affects the emerging monetary pragmatics of Bitcoin, particularly in lowincome, non-Western societies, calls for a closer examination of diverse connections forged along the increasingly global digital pathways.
The ambiguousalliance of new technologies and customary social money uses creates a hybridcombination of tradition and modernity, of expanding individual networks, andtraditional kin and community values.
We contend that this novel connectivehybridity can be most clearly observed in the functioning of transnational remittance transfers and networks – an expression of family values and communityloyalties in the novel context of rapidly growing global mobility; traditional payments moving along new payment rails.Despite its potential to revolutionize global remittance transfers, the use ofBitcoin for cross-border remittances faces several regulatory, institutional, andlogistical challenges.
This section explores these in the example country casesfrom Asia and Africa.
It argues that the emerging digital currency space isincreasingly recognized and regulated on national and international levels by themeans of the transmission of that currency through person-to-person paymentrails – one could say that Bitcoin is increasingly legally defined as remittance.The regulation of the remittance transfer industry is still largely defined bythe consequences of the recent “de-risking” movement that began as a 2013 initiative of the US Department of Justice to investigate the banking activities ofcompanies deemed as posing high risk.
This resulted in many commercial banksclosing the accounts of the correspondent banks and remittance companies indeveloping countries.
While the initiative formally ended in 2015, many banksremain cautious of doing business with money transfer companies.
US-baseddigital currency companies also face burdensome federal and local regulation.The law of digital currency in the United States is governed by two regimes:money transmitter regulation of the Department of the Treasury’s FinancialCrimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), and securities regulation of the SecuritiesCryptocurrencies and digital payment rails  121and Exchange Commission (Santori, 2013).
Businesses transacting Bitcoin aredesignated as money services businesses and have to follow FinCEN’s AntiMoney-Laundering and Know-Your-Customer policies (AML/KYC).
As theyhave to collect identifying customer information and report suspicions of criminal activity, the regulation potentially conflicts with the inherent nature ofprivacy and anonymity of Bitcoin transactions (Santori, 2013).
Fintech companies do have the option of applying to be regulated as “special purpose banks,”which offers some additional flexibility.15 Still at present, only three US Bitcoinexchanges have been issued the license (Circle, Ripple, and Coinbase).Although US regulations appear burdensome to potential digital moneytransfer companies, the United States remains one of the few countries in theworld that has made systematic efforts to regulate digital currencies.16 In manyemerging economies, digital currencies continue to be regarded with distrust.The Central Bank of Kenya recently cautioned citizens about Bitcoin’s status as“unregulated currency” – a caution typical to many central banks.
Meanwhile,recent regulatory developments in the Philippines (an economy highly dependenton remittances) demonstrate some of the developing country ambivalence aboutdigital currency.
In February 2017, the Central Bank of the Philippines (BSP)published guidelines for Bitcoin exchanges, de facto designating these as a formof a remittance company.
The new money transfer businesses are required toapply for a Certificate of Registration and also register with the country’s AntiMoney Laundering Council Secretariat.
BSP positioned these new regulations ofcryptocurrency exchanges “from the perspective of anti-money laundering andfinancial stability.”17 It emphasized that its intention was not to endorse Bitcoinas a currency as it “is neither issued or guaranteed by a central bank nor backedby any commodity.”Bitcoin remittances are subject to various constraints relating to financialmarket ecosystems, liquidity, as well as price volatility.
There are several components to a cross-border Bitcoin remittance corridor: in most cases, the “firstmile” remittance outlets or online services where migrant remittance sendersdeposit their remittances; and the “last mile” partner who receives the moneyand client details, and forwards the payment to the payout channels.
The payoutchannels can include banks, post offices, and various local cash pickup outlets(jewelry stores, pawnbrokers, etc.) (Buenaventura, 2017).
Thus, corridors utilizeBitcoin only as a “middle” currency to facilitate instant settlement and avoidgoing through the international wire transfer system.
The problems in that chainfrequently lie with the last mile partner, which may not have enough Bitcoinliquidity to convert the incoming remittances to local currency (ibid.).The institutional partnership issues in these digital ecosystems are mostclearly revealed in interfacing with existing money delivery businesses and pathways.
Particularly in countries with large migrant populations, there exist multiple ways for local delivery of transnational remittances – including retail stores,mobile money wallets, courier delivery, and collection in physical bankbranches.
While this redundancy may make markets less vulnerable to disruption, the lack of a clear “market leader” can challenge local-level integration for122  D.
Rodima-Taylor and W.W.
Grimesremittance transfer operators (Allison, 2016; Buenaventura, 2014).
Existingservice charges may still apply – for example, in the Philippines, Bitcoin-basedremittance services continue to operate along the “last mile” rails of traditionalremittance outlets that have no incentive to lower their fees for cryptocurrencytransfers.18Partnering with mobile money networks for local delivery can be essential forthe success of cryptocurrency-based remittance systems, but this raises newchallenges since Bitcoin remittance startups must acquire enough customers totake advantage of network effects.
Paradoxically, integrating with such platforms for local distribution may only be feasible in areas of already existingviable mobile money ecosystems, but this may also reduce the scalability of thebusiness model and its adaptiveness in different contexts (Breloff and Bond,2015).
On the other hand, well-functioning international remittance services canadd to the viability of domestic mobile money platforms and could incentivizemobile money companies to seek such partnerships.There has been extensive experimentation with Bitcoin-based remittancetransfers in South-East Asian remittance markets in recent years.
Cryptocurrencyremittance markets are particularly developed in the Philippines and in Vietnam(where the Bitcoin company Bitcoin Vietnam operates a remittance platform,cash2vn).19 The Philippines is the third-largest remittance recipient in the world,receiving an estimated US$27.5 billion in 2014 (Buenaventura, 2017).
Multiplecryptocurrency companies have entered the Philippines remittance market, offering easy and convenient ways for transacting Bitcoin by utilizing both bank andnon-bank institutions to access the services.
Among the country’s best knownBitcoin-based remittance initiatives are the mobile wallet-based coins.ph, whichruns on blockchain technology, and a remittance platform Rebit.ph (SatoshiCitadel Industries).
Coins.ph has a network of 17,000 locations in the Philippines(which is more than the number of bank offices and branches in the country),collaborating in remittance delivery with banks and a variety of licensed localretail agents.
The mobile payments company provides remittance transfer services and institutional and retail payments by means of Bitcoin and Philippinepesos.
Facilitating international remittance transfers via Bitcoin medium, itbypasses high exchange rate margins and fees of traditional remittance operators.20 (The transaction fees of coins.ph range from 1–3 percent, instead of the7–8 percent traditional remittance fees.21)The growing popularity of Bitcoin in the Philippines could be explained bythe inefficiencies of the formal financial sector in expanding financial access aswell as high remittance transfer fees of traditional channels.
Despite the recentrapid economic growth, financial inclusion in the country remains limited, andmigrant remittances are central to local livelihoods.
Only about a third of theadult population keeps their savings in a bank account (Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas – BSP, 2015).
Migrant senders and remittance receivers have been increasingly relying on local remittance transfer outlets over formal banking services.
Ithas been estimated that there are over 11,000 remittance outlets in the country.Digital finance is increasingly seen as a tool to enhance financial inclusion asCryptocurrencies and digital payment rails  123well as encourage e-commerce and empower small businesses in the Philippines.The central bank has facilitated experimentation with digital financial servicesand encouraged the entry of non-bank companies to the financial services arena.The crypto-remittance company Bitpesa in Africa is an illustrative case ofboth the challenges and potentials of digital global payment rails within changing financial inclusion ecosystems.
Bitpesa sought to revolutionize Africancross-border remittance space by providing fast, transparent, and low-costcryptocurrency remittance services.
It facilitates a Bitcoin-based digital currencyplatform alongside a network of global foreign currency brokers.
Its customersinclude small businesses and enterprises as well as individuals who send moneyfrom developed and emerging economies (including the UK, US, and China) toSub-Saharan Africa.
The company is currently operating in Nigeria, Kenya,Uganda, Tanzania, Senegal, and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Its coveragespans over 85 countries, and the company has integrated with six mobile platforms and 60 banks.
The traditional banking sector in Kenya has limited outreach, particularly among low-income and rural populations.
Other remittanceactors in Kenya include large international money transfer operators, such asWestern Union and MoneyGram, which have a globally well-established customer base, as well as local and regional mobile network operators such asM-Pesa and Airtel (MIT, 2016).
Western Union and MoneyGram deduct $10–17to wire $200 to Kenya from the US, including charges to exchange funds, in aprocess that can take anything from an hour to five days.22 Bitpesa employs a flattransaction fee of only 2 percent, compared with an average 12 percent cost oftraditional remittance transfers in the continent.
These fees are possible as theBitcoin-based remittance services bypass traditional intermediaries such as correspondent banks and their high fees in many less competitive corridors.23Engaging in Africa–Asia remittance corridors, Bitpesa has created cost-effectiveways for individuals and businesses to transfer payments in local currency fromAfrican bank accounts to Chinese bank accounts, without relying on the USdollar as an intermediary currency.
Despite the inherent appeal of low-costdigital remittances, however, Bitpesa has yet to make a significant impact.
In2015, Bitpesa transmitted $2.7 million of an estimated $32 billion African remittance market, generating revenue of $67,000 (MIT 2016).Because the regulatory framework around cryptocurrencies is still emergingin many African states, compliance continues to pose challenges, as demonstrated by a recent regulatory controversy in Kenya’s $1.5 billion remittancemarket.
A number of legal disputes have occurred between digital currency operators and Kenyan authorities over the implications of Bitcoin to AML/KYC regulations.
In 2015, the Central Bank of Kenya issued a statement that theoperations of the Bitcoin platform Bitpesa did not fall under the purview of themoney transfer and remittance regulations of the Central Bank of Kenya, findinginstead that Bitcoin was an unregulated currency.24 In response, Safaricom suspended its collaboration with an M-Pesa affiliated payments platform that wasutilized by Bitpesa,25 arguing that its activities were not in compliance withKenyan AML laws.26124  D.
Rodima-Taylor and W.W.
GrimesBitpesa and other Bitcoin competitors have faced regulatory challenges andthe lack of a viable local cryptocurrency ecosystem as existing players in theremittance market have been reluctant to expand into Bitcoin-based platforms.For example, Kipochi, a cryptocurrency remittance platform, integrated withSafaricom’s M-Pesa network in 2014, but ceased its activities within a year.27Bitpesa does remain active in several African countries, including Kenya, andhas successfully expanded to West Africa.
However, its primary focus is nolonger on private remittances, but digital business-to-business payments, including serving as a platform for wholesale remittance companies.
Perhaps the mostdeveloped jurisdiction for digital currency is South Africa, which has severalBitcoin exchanges and platforms for services such as utility payments.28The market position of crypto-companies such as Bitpesa is also affected byfintech players that provide support services, the most important of which arepayment aggregators.
Payment aggregators are companies that facilitate the “collection, disbursement, and circulation of digital payments across multiplepayment providers.” Aggregators enable payment instrument providers – such asmobile money services, credit card companies, or banks offering mobile banking– cost-efficient integration with entities that send money to or receive moneyfrom end customers (McKay and Pillai, 2016).
Most of the aggregators in theEast African mobile money landscape are ICT companies that provide valueadded services to banks and mobile network operators, such as running switches,providing forex and settlement services, and coordinating the services of merchants and agents (Realini and Mehta, 2015: 61–2).
Other important but littleknown actors in the global cryptocurrency chains include smaller wholesaleremittance companies in diaspora communities, shaping the evolving transnational payment rails through social and cultural knowledge.
Diaspora communities and businesses are the main customers of these startups.29In the country cases discussed above, the rapid rise of Bitcoin as a competitive player in the diverse cross-border remittance market in the Philippinescould be largely attributed to the effective (albeit constantly challenged) partnerships of the crypto-remittance companies with the existing local distributionchannels, which were diverse and widespread, taking care of the “last mile”issue.
Mobile money platforms frequently invest heavily in the last mile infrastructure, then establish exclusive control and use rights.30 In the case of Bitpesain Kenya, the failure of partnering with the effective but monopolistic M-Pesadelivery infrastructure could be seen as a central reason for the Bitcoin companyto shift its activities geographically as well as refocus from individual remittersto businesses as their main customer group.Thus, the success of crypto-remittances depends on the existence of robustmoney delivery infrastructures in the area, as well as effective partnering withthem.
This also suggests that crypto-remittance companies could be more competitive in environments with a diversity of established delivery channels andoutlets, as monopolistic delivery markets may currently not have enough incentives to include crypto-startups in their activities.
The widely existing exclusivityarrangements of many banks and telecommunications companies involved inCryptocurrencies and digital payment rails  125cross-border remittance delivery are among the main impediments to cryptoremittances in many parts of the developing world (Overseas Development Institute, 2014; Financial Sector Deepening Africa, 2017).
Much of this is driven byregulation, including AML/KYC rules in developed economies and competitionpolicies in developing economies.
To make digital financial transfers (includingboth e-money as well as cryptocurrencies) work in developing economies, a“tiered” approach to KYC rules has been advocated when working with theunbanked – a regulatory innovation that still remains to be implemented in manyareas of the developing world.31Development experts and donor organizations advocate a risk-based approachto customer identification strategies that facilitates financial inclusion of culturallyand socially diverse financial norms and institutions (including Islamic finance)(FSD Africa, 2017; Gelbard et al., 2014).
The impact of regulation to innovation isparticularly pronounced in underdeveloped financial markets, where it coordinatesthe input of the fragmented and fragile private sector (FSD Africa, 2017).However, regulation must also be understood as political in nature; in order tounderstand the choices made in a given country, it is essential to delve more deeplyinto legal systems, macroeconomic management, and patterns of ownership,among other factors.
While this task is beyond the scope of this chapter, it offers afertile research agenda for scholars of comparative public policy.Digital payment rails in the networked world order:concluding remarksBitcoin has a theoretical potential to profoundly transform the ways peopletransfer and use money, and associate with each other and broader social institutions.
The legal definition as well as social conceptualization of digital currencies occur mainly as based on their movement through payment infrastructures– cryptocurrencies are often defined through their role as remittances or personto-person payments.
Because of the profound inefficiencies of traditional remittance systems in many developing economies, the remittance industry has beenripe for disruption through the blockchain technology.
Remittances also oftenserve as an important entry-point to the formal financial system in cash-basedeconomies.The emerging concept of digital financial inclusion captures the increasingrelevance of mobile-money-based domestic transfers as well as cryptocurrencybased cross-border remittances in the livelihoods of many developing economies.
It also highlights a possible paradigm change in the financial inclusionconcept, which instead of savings- or credit-led models is now increasinglyfocused on the establishment of digital payment rails for broader financialaccess.
This new model builds on an increasing recognition of the ubiquitousinformal networks of mutual obligation and debt in developing economies, aswell as their role in integrating and transforming financial inclusion initiatives.The discussions of the chapter demonstrated the capacities of e-money anddigital currencies to amplify and transform existing reciprocal networks of126  D.
Rodima-Taylor and W.W.
Grimesperson-to-person transfers and exchange.
Evidence from East Africa showed thatmobile money services link into existing cycles and networks of reciprocity, aswell as alter social relationships by bringing about more impersonal bases ofexchange.
Digital financial services enabled their users a fuller integration intothe financial system that encompassed both the formal and informal sectors.They also facilitated a transformation and democratization of the financial inclusion phenomenon through enhanced local participation and innovation.The innovation ecosystems that emerged around mobile and digital currenciesbuilt on local knowledge and patterns of resource management, culturalmonetary practices, and customary kin and community values.
The discussionsrevealed how actors in these ecosystems assembled diverse material and normative elements belonging to different repertoires and regimes of value, and hownew economic and financial elements and functions emerged from that creativebricolage.
Local retail agents and outlets constituted an important part of thedigital finance innovation ecosystem, and their dual functions of mediation andrepresentation illustrated the ambiguities that digital finance networks pose foragency and participation.
As indicated, many of the hybrid organizational formsprevalent in local developing economies combine peer-oriented and egalitariandimensions with new forms of individual advancement.
Similar duality characterizes the promise of the digital currencies of decentralized resource management and governance systems that advance novel forms of individual autonomybased on crypto-code and smart contract, while heralding a new peer-based community.
That necessitates more attention to the interplay of the contingent knowledges of local monetary pragmatics, and new institutions and technologies inemerging digital finance assemblages.The communicative network of digital payment rails could be seen as illustrative of a broader dynamic of an emergent “networked world order” (Slaughter,2004), where global governance is shaped by a growing disaggregation of actorsand processes, but also by a new type of relational sovereignty stemming fromconnections forged through participation and agency.
As seen, the digital paymentsspace includes a multiplicity of global and national standard-setting bodies, development agencies and experts, funders and philanthropists, financial institutions,fintech companies, retail agents, and consumers.
The emerging financial technology landscape brings along a novel type of disaggregation of financial services,but also new forms of consolidation of these along digital financial platforms.These platforms function as a network infrastructure with a potential to integrateother actors and institutions, as the analysis of mobile money systems in EastAfrica revealed.
The digital networks are amplified but also instilled with newqualities through that process of “platformization,” where new services, actors, andmodes of business are added on to existing templates, stimulating innovation anduser-based initiatives.
The chapter contends that digital and e-currencies are instrumental in the new modes of platformization of global payment rails that increasingly shape financial inclusion in low-income communities.The challenges and potentials inherent in the digital concept of financialinclusion highlight the centrality of novel institutional partnerships and newCryptocurrencies and digital payment rails  127connections between the local and the global.
They also call for a systematicstudy of local practices and systems of inclusive innovation that occur in thecontexts of spreading digital finance.
Both mobile money and digital currenciesmultiply existing networks of credit and reciprocity and facilitate novel connections and transfer chains.
They disrupt financial inclusion and the traditional financial sector by involving novel types of actors and forms of partnership, with apotential to change the power balance among traditional financial institutions.As the still novel digital-currency-based remittance transfers are introduced andembedded in a growing number of global remittance corridors, regulators,policy-makers, and development experts need to pay attention to fostering competitive markets and sustainable institutional partnerships.This chapter describes a situation where informal financial practices and financial inclusion initiatives in the Global South are increasingly interminglingwith new communication infrastructures.
As noted, the adoption of digitalfinance in East African communities may have been motivated by the opportunity to expand networks of mutual obligation, rather than the advantages of themore efficient money transfer and savings options provided by the digital moneyplatform.
In these new currency ecosystems, researchers should focus on howinclusive innovation practices arise within the emerging network dynamics ofdigital transactions.
By more fully understanding the emerging meanings of thecirculating digital currency, we can better analyze their broader social and political governance effects.AcknowledgmentsThe authors of this chapter would like to thank the volume editor MalcolmCampbell-Verduyn for his valuable advice and insights, and the participants ofthe “Bitcoin and Beyond” workshop (Balsillie School of International Affairs,February 27, 2017) for providing a stimulating venue for discussions thatinspired the revisions of this chapter.
We also thank participants of the panel discussion on Digital Remittances in Crisis-Affected Contexts at the InternationalMonetary Fund in October 2015, where earlier versions of the chapter materialwere presented.Notes1 The “de-risking” movement that started in 2013 with a purpose to investigate thebanking activities of companies deemed as posing high risk resulted in many commercial banks closing the accounts of the correspondent banks and remittance companies in developing countries.2 Rotolo et al.
(2015: 1840) define emerging technologies asa relatively fast growing and radically novel technology characterized by a certaindegree of coherence persisting over time and with the potential to exert a considerable impact on the socio-economic domain(s) which is observed in terms of thecomposition of actors, institutions and the patterns of interactions among those,along with the associated knowledge production processes.128  D.
Rodima-Taylor and W.W.
Grimes3 An example of innovators includes the Equity Bank’s M-Kesho product that is adeposits and savings bank product linked with M-Pesa.
Innovators include many newsavings, credit, and insurance products that utilize the existing mobile money platform(e.g., a new person product of Jua Kali, the association of informal workers).
Bridgebuilders include software developers and other specialists who facilitate mobilemoney connections with established financial institutions, or build interoperabilitywith other digital payments providers (ibid.).4 The GPFI 2016 White Paper outlines standards and guidance to the following globalbodies:the Financial Stability Board (FSB), which exists as a coordinating body of SSBswith respect to financial stability, and six SSBs: the Basel Committee for BankingSupervision (BCBS), the primary SSB for supervisors of banks and other deposittaking institutions; the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures(CPMI), the primary SSB with respect to payment systems, including retailpayment systems; the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the SSB responsiblefor protecting the integrity of financial systems by preventing financial crime, particularly through standards and guidance on anti-money laundering and combatingfinancing of terrorism (AML/CFT); the International Association of Deposit Insurers (IADI), the SSB for deposit insurance systems; the International Associationof Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), the primary SSB for insurance supervision; andthe International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), the primarySSB for the securities sector.(GPFI, 2016: xii)5 At first, M-Pesa started as a platform for microfinance loans, utilizing airtime vendorsas entry points to the payment system.
It gradually grew into a complex platform forperson-to-person as well as retail payments by means of forwarding value via textmessages (Maurer, 2015).6 Due to regulatory, socio-economic, and institutional conditions, country contexts cansignificantly differ.
The M-Pesa platform that was launched in Tanzania in 2008 byVodacom has recently overcome the challenges caused by prevalent interoperabilityand multi-agent networks.
In South Africa, however, M-Pesa services were recentlydiscontinued – possibly because of the existence of an advanced and inclusivebanking sector, and regulatory reasons (Rosengard, 2016: 21).7 https://citizentv.co.ke/business/banks-cut-out-middleman-with-pesalink-launch-158005/8 The Kenyan Financial Diaries research project (FSD Kenya) aimed at a comprehensive overview of people’s money use patterns and financial inclusion needs,recording the transactions of 300 low-income households in five locations of thecountry over the period of a year.9 The 2009 study highlighted the cost-effectiveness and convenience of mobiledomestic remittances over other available transfer options: “sending 1,000 Ksh(US$13.06) through M-PESA cost US$0.39, which is 27 percent cheaper than thepost office’s PostaPay (US$0.52), and 68 percent cheaper than sending it via a buscompany (US$1.16)” (2).10 “Small money” refers to “deposits ranging from 100 Ksh (US$1.30) to 1,000 Ksh(US$13.00), or approximately one week’s wages” (3).11 Among Tanzanian micro-entrepreneurs, mobile telephony led to the emergence of“socio-technical capital” – “productive resources which inhere in patterns of socialrelations that are maintained with the support of information and communication technologies” (Molony, 2009: 78).
Molony argues that this novel form of social capitalthat is facilitated by the means of ICT applications helped African micro-entrepreneursto expand their customer base and move from personal towards impersonal exchange.12 The global centers of expertise on mobile money include the Consultative Group toAssist the Poor (CGAP), the GSMA or global trade association of telecommunicationCryptocurrencies and digital payment rails  129providers, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), USAID and some other bilateral development agencies, various IT anddesign firms, and payments industry firms – including major card networks as well assmall startups or third-party payment providers (54).13 The contemporary traditional banking model includes a hybrid of commercial banksas “dispersed and fragmented” nodes of ledger keeping, and the central bank operating as a “trust backstop” (ibid.).14 With the historical evolvement of double-entry ledger systems and public accounting manuals, the systems of data management became a “vehicle for promotingemerging mercantile power against the King’s traditional rule” (11) – by makingledger systems public, they were turned into powerful tools of governance andpolitical restructuring.15 www.orrick.com/Insights/2016/12/National-Bank-Charters-for-Fintech-Companies16 Please see the chapter by Campbell-Verduyn and Goguen in this volume for moredetails about the impact of the global anti-money-laundering regime on blockchainapplications.17 www.coindesk.com/philippines-just-released-new-rules-bitcoin-exchanges/18 https://medium.com/cryptonight/bitcoin-doesn-t-make-remittances-cheaper-eb5f437849fe#.shqxjn4d319 www.cash2vn.com/20 http://asia.nikkei.com/Politics-Economy/Economy/Asia-has-all-the-ingredients-for-afintech-revolution21 http://fintechnews.sg/5978/philippines/top-24-fintech-startups-forbes-philippines/22 The World Bank Send Money Africa database.23 www.forbes.com/sites/laurashin/2016/06/15/elizabeth-rossiello-describes-how-bitpesaslashes-international-payment-fees/#105259c6475d24 www.cryptocoinsnews.com/telecombitpesa-legal-tangle-aml-threatens-mobile-paymentskenya/25 The partnership between the companies allowed customers to convert Bitcoin intoKenyan shillings for remittances and retail payments.26 www.cryptocoinsnews.com/central-bank-kenya-threatened-bitcoin/27 https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/the-western-myth-of-bitcoin-in-kenya28 https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/cash-still-trumps-mobile-payments-and-bitcoinin-africa-1481148103/29 E.
Rossiello, CEO of Bitpesa, January 2017, interview with the author.30 E.
Rossiello, CEO of Bitpesa, January 2017, interview with the author.31 While presenting new challenges in the areas of customer verification, digital financetechnologies also carry a promise of enhanced transparency and monitoring not onlyof the identities of money senders and receivers, but also transactions.
A new “KnowYour Transaction” paradigm enabled by the immutable blockchain technology couldenable an “unprecedented level of forensic analysis to be carried out on the transactions themselves” (Buenaventura, 2017: 26).BibliographyAllison, I.
(2016).
Cross-border payments experts debate Bitcoin remittances.
RetrievedAugust 24, 2017, from www.ibtimes.co.uk/cross-border-payments-experts-debatebitcoin-remittances-1561983Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP).
(2015).
National Baseline Survey on Financial Inclusion.Bayen M., and Ajadi, S.
(2017, January 13).
Building synergies: How mobile operators andstart-ups can partner for impact in emerging markets.
Retrieved August 24, 2017, from130  D.
Rodima-Taylor and W.W.
Grimeswww.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programme/ecosystem-accelerator/buildingsynergies-how-mobile-operators-and-start-ups-can-partner-for-impact-in-emergingmarketsBernards, N.
(2016).
The International Labour Organization and the ambivalent politicsof financial inclusion in West Africa.
New Political Economy, 21(6): 606–20.Berry, S.
(1995).
Stable prices, unstable values: Some thoughts on monetization and themeaning of transactions in West African economies.
In J.I.
Guyer (ed.), Money matters.Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Breloff, P., and Bond, J.
(2015).
Picking winners in the great remittance disruption.Washington, DC: CGAP.Buenaventura, L.
(2017).
Reinventing remittances with Bitcoin.
Singapore: Bloom Solutions.Buenaventura, L.
(2014).
The short-term view on Bitcoin remittances.
Retrieved August24, 2017, from www.coindesk.com/short-term-view-bitcoin-remittances/Casey, M., and Dahan, M.
(2016).
Blockchain technology: Redefining trust for a global,digital economy.
Retrieved August 24, 2017, from https://medium.com/mit-media-labdigital-currency-initiative/blockchain-technology-redefining-trust-for-a-global-digitaleconomy-1dc869593308DuPont, Q., and Maurer, B.
(2015, June 23).
Ledgers and law in the blockchain.
King’sReview.
http://kingsreview.co.uk/articles/ledgers-and-law-in-the-blockchain/.FinAccess.
(2016).
2016 FinAccess household survey.
Nairobi: FSD Kenya.Financial Sector Deepening Africa.
(2017).
Financing the frontier: Inclusive financialsector development in fragility-affected states in Africa.
Report.
Nairobi: FSD Africa.Gabor, D., and Brooks, S.
(2017).
The digital revolution in financial inclusion: International development in the fintech era.
New Political Economy, 22(4): 423–36.Gelbard, E., Hussain, M., Maino, R., Mu, Y., and Yehoue, E.
(2014).
Islamic finance in SubSaharan Africa: Status and prospects.
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion.
(2016).
Global standard setting bodies andfinancial inclusion: The evolving landscape.
Washington, DC: GPFI.Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion.
(2014).
Digital financial inclusion and theimplications for customers, regulators, supervisors and standard-setting bodies.
IssuesPaper.
Washington, DC: GPFI.GSMA.
(2014).
2013 state of the industry report on mobile financial services for theunbanked.
London: GSMA.Jack, W., Ray, A., and Suri, T.
(2013).
Transaction networks: Evidence from mobilemoney in Kenya.
American Economic Review, 103(3): 356–61.Johnson, S.
(2014).
Informal financial practices and social networks: Transaction genealogies.
Nairobi: FSD Kenya.Kendall, J., Machoka, P., Veniard, C., and Maurer, B.
(2012).
An emerging platform:From money transfer system to mobile money ecosystem.
Innovations, 6(4): 49–64.Latour, B.
(2005).
Reassembling the social: Introduction to actor-network theory.
Oxford:Oxford University Press.Lauer, K., and Lyman, T.
(2015).
Digital financial inclusion: Implications for customers,regulators, supervisors, and standard setting bodies.
Washington, DC: CGAP.Ledgerwood, J.
(2013).
The new microfinance handbook: A financial market system perspective.
Washington, DC: World Bank.Li, T.
(2007).
Practices of assemblage and community forest management.
Economy andSociety, 36(2): 263–93.Mallard, A., Méadel, C., and Musiani, F.
(2014).
The paradoxes of distributed trust: Peerto-peer architecture and user confidence in Bitcoin.
Journal of Peer Production, 4.Cryptocurrencies and digital payment rails  131Mas, I., and Radcliffe, D.
(2010).
Mobile payments go viral: M-PESA in Kenya.
Seattle:Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.Maurer, B.
(2015).
How would you like to pay? How technology is changing the future ofmoney.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.Maurer, B.
(2012).
Mobile money: Communication, consumption and change in the payments space.
Journal of Development Studies, 48(5): 589–604.Maurer, B., Nelms, T., and Rea, S.
(2013).
“Bridges to cash”: Channeling agency inmobile money.
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 19(1): 52–74.Maurer, B., Nelms, T., and Swartz, L.
(2013).
“When perhaps the real problem is moneyitself!”: The practical materiality of Bitcoin.
Social Semiotics, 23(2): 261–77.McKay, C., and Pillai, R.
(2016).
Aggregators: The secret sauce to digital financialexpansion.
Washington DC: CGAP.
Retrieved August 24, 2017, from www.cgap.org/blog/aggregators-secret-sauce-digital-financial-expansionMIT.
(2016).
Exploring the competitive landscape.
Example Project Group 11, Module 4.Boston: MIT.Molony, T.
(2009).
Carving a niche: ICT, social capital, and trust in the shift from personal to impersonal trading in Tanzania.
Information Technology for Development,15(4): 283–302.Morawczynski, O., and Pickens, M.
(2009).
Poor people using mobile financial services:Observations on customer usage and impact from M-PESA.
Washington, DC: CGAP.Ndungu, N.
(2017).
Regulatory environment and technological innovation in Africa.
InBrookings Institution (ed.) Boosting transformational technology.
Report.
Washington,DC: Brookings Institution.Ochieng, L.
(2016, April 27).
M-Pesa reports 27 pc jump in global users to 25 million.Daily Nation.Overseas Development Institute.
(2014).
Lost in intermediation: How excessive chargesundermine the benefits of remittances for Africa.
London: ODI.Radcliffe, D., and Voorhies, R.
(2012).
A digital pathway to financial inclusion.
Seattle:Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.Realini, C., and Mehta, K.
(2015).
Financial inclusion at the bottom of the pyramid.Altona, Canada: FriesenPress.Rodima-Taylor, D.
(2016).
Gathering up mutual help: Work, personhood, and relationalfreedoms in Tanzania and Melanesia.
In K.
Myhre (ed.) Cutting and connecting: ‘Afrinesian’ perspectives on networks, relationality, and exchange.
New York, Oxford: Berghahn.Rodima-Taylor, D.
(2014).
Passageways of cooperation: Mutuality in post-socialist Tanzania.
Africa: The Journal of the International African Institute, 84(4): 553–75.Rodima-Taylor, D.
(ed.) (2013).
Remittance flows to post-conflict states: Perspectives onhuman security and development.
Boston: Boston University.Rosengard, J.
(2016).
A quantum leap over high hurdles to financial inclusion: Themobile banking revolution in Kenya.
Working Paper.
Cambridge, MA: HarvardKennedy School.Rotolo, D., Hicks, D., and Martin, B.
(2015).
What is an emerging technology? ResearchPolicy, 44(10): 1827–43.Santori, M.
(2013).
Bitcoin law: What U.S.
businesses need to know.
Retrieved August24, 2017, from www.coindesk.com/bitcoin-law-what-us-businesses-need-to-know/Schwittay, A.
(2011).
The financial inclusion assemblage: Subjects, technics, rationalities.
Critique of Anthropology, 31(4): 381–401.Slaughter, A.
(2004).
Disaggregated Sovereignty: Towards the Public Accountability ofGlobal Government Networks.
Government and Opposition 39(2): 159–190.132  D.
Rodima-Taylor and W.W.
GrimesToivanen, H., Mutafungwa, E., Hyvönen, J., and Ngogo, E.
(2012).
Pro-poor social andeconomic opportunities in the African ICT innovation ecosystem.
Finland: VTT Technical Research Center of Finland.World Bank.
(2016).
Migration and Development Brief 26.Wright, A., and De Filippi, P.
(2015).
Decentralized blockchain technology and the riseof lex cryptographia.
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2580664Zimmerman, J., and Baur, S.
(2015).
Understanding how consumer risks in digital socialpayments can erode their financial inclusion potential.
Washington, DC: CGAP.Zollman, J.
(2014).
Kenya financial diaries – Shilingi kwa shilingi, the financial lives ofthe poor.
Nairobi: FSD Kenya.7 Governing what wasn’t meant tobe governedA controversy-based approach to thestudy of Bitcoin governanceFrancesca Musiani, Alexandre Mallard, andCécile MéadelIntroductionIs it possible to implement trustworthy governance mechanisms for Bitcoin – thetechnology that, by design and by manifesto, “was not meant to be governed” tobegin with?1 This question has been raised several times since the creation ofBitcoin, which has been presented as an “alternative” currency circumventingstate-­backed financial and economic institutions.
It is no coincidence that Bitcoin’s birth and swift rise took place at the very moment in recent history, 2008,when the worldwide financial crisis exposed the shortcomings and unsavoryinner workings of the global financial system.
Not meant to be controlled by anycentral authority, Bitcoin’s monetary supply is shaped and defined by its namesake protocol – its cornerstone being that from the inception of the system, thetotal amount of Bitcoins that could ever be created was known and established inadvance (21 million), and so was their generation rate over time.
The generationof Bitcoins is based on an activity called mining, based on the principle that Bitcoins are assigned as a reward to those users – the miners – that lend their computing and hard-disk resources to the system for operational and securitypurposes.
The establishment of the system’s functioning as “purely” technical,as mentioned, was strictly related to the alleged aim of wiping corruption and“human-­made” dangerous and speculative practices from finance and markets.Banks and states could not be trusted anymore, opening the way to a trustless,cryptography-­reliant, architecture-­based solution.
However – and as we haveexplored in previous work (Mallard et al., 2014) – when Bitcoin started becoming a global network and raised interest and business opportunities for a varietyof actors worldwide, including a number of new market intermediaries, the issueof trust came back in full color, raising questions related to the global redistribution of authority and power – and governance.This chapter tackles the question of Bitcoin governance from a perspectivegrounded in science and technology studies, in particular the sociology of sociotechnical controversies.
Following the foundational work of authors in the actor–network theory (ANT) tradition (Callon, 1986; Latour, 1987), we use the term134   F.
Musiani et al.“socio-technical controversy” to refer to every debate questioning the distinctionbetween the technical and social elements involved in an issue, exploring theboundary between the known and the uncertain, and transforming the components of the issue as well as the networks of entities involved.
We also draw fromthe argument, frequent in ANT-­derived perspectives, that the size and magnitudeof a controversy is not predictable at the beginning, and that in any case, it doesnot explain its resolution in the end.
As a whole, one can find in the short yetcharged history of Bitcoin manifold such debates, where what seemed to be atechnical issue ends up as a political problem, where the explanations of a crashmix technical limits and financial crisis, where doubt is raised on the frontierbetween what belongs to the blockchain and what belongs to intermediaries, andso on.
Furthermore, these debates have variable magnitudes: they may berestricted to a temporary dispute in an online forum, or extend to a large array ofactors intervening on the cryptocurrency.
We postulate that such controversialevents in Bitcoin’s recent history, that brought to light tensions, conflicts, ordivergences among relevant Bitcoin actors on specific aspects – be they the modification of a technical feature, the organization and hierarchy among core developers, or the introduction or disappearance of an intermediary – are useful loci toobserve the “making of” Bitcoin governance.
Thus, by observing such events,the chapter seeks to answer the following research questions: how are structuring dynamics of governance, such as collective action and debate, consensus,and intervention of public actors, “unveiled” by controversy? Who are the actorstaking, or being entrusted with, responsibility and authority, in particular when itcomes to decentralizing or re-­centralizing specific components of the system?To seek an answer to these questions, we examine three core events of Bitcoin’s short yet tumultuous history that were the subject of widespread publicdebate and controversy in instances when “revealing” events took place – andthus relevant to investigate the issue of governance.
A first controversy concernsthe reliability of the networks and protocols subtending the blockchain and itsintegrity, which has been challenged, for example, by a number of security failures and hijacks between 2010 and 2014, as well as, more recently, by the implementation of a “hard fork,” Bitcoin XT, in late 2015.
A second controversy isthe currency’s ambiguous links with the dark economy epitomized by the SilkRoad affair, started in 2011.
A third controversy is the development of an articulate ecosystem of Bitcoin intermediaries that gradually introduced the digitalcurrency into international networks of commerce and finance and exposed it toa number of “non-­purely-technical” points of vulnerability and exploitation.
Thelandmark episode in this regard was the dramatic shutdown of the MtGox platform in 2014.This chapter offers a reading of Bitcoin’s governance history alongside thesethree dimensions.
We adopt a science and technology studies (STS) informedcontroversy-­analysis perspective to examine in which ways, as the manifoldfacets of this digital currency developed, the issue of governance has been at thecenter of different problematizations, at the articulation of technology, economy,and politics.
The controversies examined in this chapter vary greatly in size andGoverning what wasn’t meant to be governed 135magnitude, as well as types of actors involved and dynamics set in motion.
Following the STS tradition, we do not postulate here that there needs to be a set ofminimal or maximal requirements for a controversy to be considered as such.From a pragmatic standpoint, the three events we examine have sparked debates,conflicts, tensions, and re-­alignments on aspects of the Bitcoin system that weconsider important to investigate its governance.As the following section will address in more detail, our analysis builds ontwo primary strands of STS literature: on one hand, work that explores the roleof information intermediaries and technical infrastructures and architectures asinstruments of Internet governance and “control points” (DeNardis, 2014),around which issues of technical and economic performance, as well as battlesover values and civil liberties, play out; on the other hand, we also build onresearch that addresses the structuring and performative effects of sociotechnical controversies on governance, and analyzes the very processes by whichnorms are created, negotiated and put to the test as no less important than the“stabilized” norms themselves.This study relies on a qualitative exploration of a corpus of press articles andexpert contributions, having Bitcoin as their core subject from its birth to thepresent day.
For each of the cases, we “unwrap” and decode several (n=6–8)written pieces – mainly specialized press and web articles, but also technical documents and forum excerpts – concerning the controversial episodes.
Through thechapter, we attempt to highlight how these different data and the particular ways inwhich controversies are narrated and understood contribute to defining the worldthey address and, thereby, propose specific forms of governance.
In conclusion,the chapter will propose a general reflection on the issue of blockchain technologygovernance, thanks to the “already-­historical” experience of Bitcoin.Approaching (Bitcoin) governance through an STS lensThe rise and development of Bitcoin, and the interdisciplinary attention it hasenjoyed, is one of the most telling examples in recent Internet history of why apredominantly institutional view of Internet governance, which was dominant inthe field’s early days, is being increasingly criticized for partially missing whatactually constitutes governance in a networked and global system.
In contrast,the latter has come to be understood as more about “environments with lowformalization, heterogeneous organizational forms, large number of actors andmassively distributed authority and decision-making power” (van Eeten andMueller, 2013: 730).
In response to such criticism, approaches informed by thefield of STS are increasingly part of the “toolbox” used to study Internet governance, broadly understood as social ordering occurring less exclusively in formalpolitical institutions, but also enacted through mundane practices of peopleengaged in maintaining or challenging social order, supported and mediated bytechnical artefacts (Woolgar and Neyland, 2013).
Two STS traditions, concepts,and methodological tools at once appear especially useful to study Bitcoin governance: the sociology of controversies and infrastructure studies.136   F.
Musiani et al.Studying Internet governance (IG) through the prism of controversies (Pinchand Leuenberger, 2006) is one STS-­informed way to unpack the complex realities subtending the “Internet” and its “governance.” As we have examined(Epstein et al., 2016), terrains such as interconnection agreements between Internet service providers, the debate around net neutrality, the use of deep-packetinspection and content filtering technologies, ubiquitous surveillance measures,the use of domain name systems for intellectual property-related regulatory aims– and, as we will see, the deployment of decentralized technologies such asBitcoin – are indeed key sites of contestation and tension over the Internet andhow formal and informal systems of normativity interact in it.
STS-­informedapproaches to IG analyze the structuring and performative effects of controversies shaping these various formal and informal arrangements of governance.Such approaches are particularly useful to analyze controversies around claimsmade by different actors or groups about “doing Internet governance,” contributing to the creation of different worlds in which specific notions of governancemake sense (Brousseau et al., 2012).
Thus, controversies unpack “governance”as a theoretical and operational concept, by exposing the plurality of notions itrefers to, and the consequences of their being in conflict (Cheniti, 2009; Ziewitzand Pentzold, 2014).
This point is explored in international relations and political science literature on how crises expose the implicit character of governance(to give but one example, Hay, 1999).
The very processes by which norms arecreated, renegotiated, put to the test, re-­aligned, raise conflicts, are as crucial –and perhaps more crucial – in STS perspectives as the “stabilized” normsthemselves.The particular subfield of STS that has been labeled as “infrastructurestudies,” stemming from Bowker and Star’s pioneering work, addresses theagency of non-human actors and technical infrastructures as loci of mediation,and explores their “political role” in interplay with a plurality of normativesystems: law, markets, discourses, and practices (Brousseau et al., 2012).
In thecase of the Internet, information intermediaries, critical Internet resources, Internet exchange points, surveillance, and security devices play crucial governanceroles alongside political, national, and supra-national institutions and civilsociety organizations (Musiani et al., 2016).
The governance of the Internet thustakes shape through a myriad of infrastructures, devices, data fluxes, and technical architectures that are often discreet and invisible, yet nevertheless crucial insubtending building the increasingly public and articulate network of networks.Laura DeNardis (2014: 11) defines these entities as infrastructural “controlpoints,” around which are entangled matters of technical and economic efficiency, as well as negotiations over human and societal values such as intellectual property rights, privacy, security, transparency.A few recent contributions apply STS perspectives more specifically to thestudy of Bitcoin and the interplay of technology and politics at stake within it.Bill Maurer et al.
(2013) coin the notion of “digital metallism,” drawing fromboth STS and the anthropology of money, to account for the combination ofmateriality and virtuality that characterizes Bitcoin.
The concept underlinesGoverning what wasn’t meant to be governed   137­Bitcoin’s dematerialization, in which the value is embedded, such as commodity money is in gold.
Digital metallism also emphasizes how, as with everytechnology supported by digital networks, the dematerialization of moneyitself is accompanied by the implementation of heavy material infrastructure.In a blend of STS and economic sociology, Henrik Karlstrøm (2014) sees the“material embeddedness” of market interactions as the primary analytical keyto understand the ways in which virtual currencies are just as intimately linkedto the institutional setup of the material world as non-­virtual currencies.
Thisanalysis thereby helps to bridge Bitcoin’s specificities with the history ofmoney to draw useful lessons from it.
Karlstrøm also notes the challengingtask that a qualitative, social science study of Bitcoin represents, due to thenovelty of the phenomenon, widespread anonymity among core actors, and thenature of the sources, many of which “are to a certain degree non-­verifiable inthe traditional academic sense – many are from transient web pages rather thanpublished research.” In a methods-­oriented contribution, also using Bitcoin asa particularly emblematic case of challenge to digital humanities approaches,Pablo Velasco (2016: 100–1) notes the distributed currency’s status as a “metamorphous” research object, observing that “[b]ecause Bitcoin is at the sametime a protocol, a currency, a software, a network and a cultural phenomenon,it can play the discontinuous role of instrument, method, and object ofresearch.” Velasco also notes that data on cryptocurrencies is “democraticallyscarce” as opposed to what is available to researchers of social networks, forexample.In today’s context of frequent hype surrounding blockchain technology, praising in particular its capacity to entirely self-regulate via the algorithms it subtends, Primavera De Filippi and Benjamin Loveluck’s (2016) contribution usesthe late 2015/early 2016 controversy over the Bitcoin XT fork to illustrate thelimitations of an over-­reliance on purely technical tools to address complexissues of governance, including elements of social coordination and economicexchange.
A previous contribution from the authors of this chapter (Mallard etal., 2014) has showed how, introducing and discussing specific devices,dynamics or operations as being in some way related to the building of trust,early expert knowledge on Bitcoin has contributed to the very definition andshaping of this trust within the Bitcoin system – ultimately contributing toperform the shared definition of its value as a currency.Taken together, these contributions draw upon STS approaches’ suitability toanalyze in a detailed and situated manner the design, construction, establishment, and appropriation of technology in a complex system such as Bitcoin.They helpfully explore the connections between the politics of Internet infrastructure and infrastructure as Internet politics.Three controversies unveiling Bitcoin governanceThis central section of the chapter presents three core, controversial events ofBitcoin history that we identify as particularly relevant to investigating its138 F.
Musiani et al.­governance.
In these instances, “revealing” events took place and led to widespread public debate on different governance dimensions.
A first dimension concerns the reliability of the networks and protocols underpinning the blockchainand its integrity, which has been challenged, for example, by a number ofsecurity failures and hijacks between 2010 and 2014, or more recently, by theimplementation of a “hard fork,” Bitcoin XT, in late 2015.
A second dimensionconcerns the development of an articulate ecosystem of Bitcoin intermediariesthat gradually introduced the digital currency into the international networks ofcommerce and finance and exposed it to a number of “non-­purely-technical”points of vulnerability and exploitation – a landmark episode in this regard beingthe dramatic shutdown of the MtGox platform in 2014.
A third dimensionaddresses the ambiguous links with the dark economy epitomized by the SilkRoad affair, which started in 2011.
This case sheds light on the role of policeinvestigations on the functioning of Bitcoin architecture.March 2013’s “involuntary fork”: protocol reliability, trust, anddecentralized governanceTo address the issue of the relationship between the reliability of the technicalprotocol and users’ trust – and its consequences for Bitcoin governance – wefirst examine the events surrounding the “involuntary fork” of March 2013.These events are of particular interest as they reveal how the Bitcoin community,from core developers to miners to at-large users, responded to a moment of crisisdeeply embedded in the technical architecture, for which both a technicalresponse and a “political” consensus on the solution needed to be developed.The events proceeded as follows: on March 11–12, 2013, a miner runningversion 0.8 of the Bitcoin software created a large invalid block (i.e., incompatible with earlier versions of the software).
This created an unintended split or“fork” in the Bitcoin blockchain, since computers with the most recent versionof the software at the time (0.8) accepted the invalid block and continued tobuild on the diverging chain, whereas older versions of the software rejected itand continued extending the older/original blockchain without the offendingblock.
This split resulted in two separate transaction logs being formed withoutclear consensus or even knowledge of the other event happening, which allowedfor the same funds to be spent twice on each chain – the very act of doublespending whose avoidance was meant to be the chief improvement of Bitcoinover earlier digital currencies.Beyond relating the incident in a straightforward manner, interestingly, Wikipedia’s account of the event adds that:Miners resolved the split by downgrading to version 0.7, putting them backon track with the canonical blockchain.
User funds largely remained unaffected and were available when network consensus was restored.
Thenetwork reached consensus and continued to operate as normal a few hoursafter the split.2Governing what wasn’t meant to be governed   139This account raises a number of interesting questions inasmuch as this unprecedented technical “glitch” required the negotiation of a new norm to reorganizeBitcoin operations into only one blockchain – and the implementation of a successful “mix” of technical, political, and social elements required to do so.
Whatactually happened behind the “resolution of the split,” and who was responsiblefor it? How did the network “reach consensus”? Did the network “operate asnormal” after this episode? Who were the actors and the actants of this sequenceof events?The first documents addressing these questions were the alert report on theBitcoin website3 and its related “post-mortem” improvement proposal,4 whichwas authored by Bitcoin core developer Gavin Andresen.
Albeit succinct andimpersonal, the former clarifies that the cause of the problem was the creation,mining, and broadcasting of a “large block […] that is incompatible withearlier versions of Bitcoin.” Meanwhile the latter argues that the issue with theblock being was that it displayed a “larger number of total transaction inputsthan previously seen.” In a subsequent analysis of the incident, Vitalik Buterin5further clarifies that the problem was linked to the release of the most recentversion of “bitcoind,” the most popular implementation tool/interface forrunning Bitcoin used by miners.
Developers of this release, labeled 0.8,switched the database that bitcoind used to store blocks and transactions fromone called BerkeleyDB to another called LevelDB, considered as more efficient and more suitable to reduce blockchain synchronization time.
However,Buterin explains:what the developers did not realize at the time was that by doing so theyalso accidentally introduced a change to the rules of the Bitcoin protocol.
Inorder to make an update to the database, the database process must make a‘lock’ on the part of the database which stores that particular item ofinformation, a mechanism implemented to prevent two changes from occurring simultaneously.LevelDB had no restrictions on the possible number of locks, but BerkeleyDBhad, and failed when a single block required more locks than this limit.Nodes running the most recent version of the Bitcoin software, 0.8, were ableto manage this large block, but some nodes running previous versions of thesoftware rejected it.
The unintended fork of the blockchain, we learn, was due tothe fact that at the time of the incident, the nodes running pre-­0.8 software versions had more sheer computing power than those running the newest version,thus automatically gaining pre-­eminence:The pre-­0.8-incompatible chain (from here on, the 0.8 chain) at that pointhad around 60% of the mining hash power ensuring the split did not automatically resolve (as would have occurred if the pre-­0.8 chain outpacedthe 0.8 chain in total work, forcing 0.8 nodes to reorganise to the pre-­0.8chain).6140   F.
Musiani et al.At this time, the incident’s account begins mentioning some specific actors ofthe Bitcoin broader ecosystem.
Two mining pools, BTCGuild and Slush, downgraded their Bitcoin 0.8 nodes to 0.7 “so their pools would also reject the largerblock.” Because of their central position in the Bitcoin mining process, the moveby these two mining pools shifted the majority of hashpower (the processingpower of the Bitcoin network) on the chain without the larger block, eventuallycausing the 0.8 nodes to reorganize to the pre-­0.8 chain.
Later on, the reportmentions this aspect – one of the early defining moves to return to one and onlystabilized norm – as a positive aspect and one in which the two mining poolswere seen as having behaved altruistically, as the downgrading of their nodeswas beneficial to the system but “caused them to sacrifice significant amounts ofmoney.” Since they had previously mined with the 0.8 version and come back to0.7, BTCGuild and Slush lost what they had mined.The report records one important instance of double-spending – the act ofsuccessfully spending some money more than once, which the distributed-yetunique blockchain ledger subtending Bitcoin generally protects against – and theinvoluntary fork made temporarily possible.
However, and interestingly, thereport notes that the act was “done by someone experimenting to see if it waspossible and was not intended to be malicious.” This person subsequently identified himself7 as a “lead user” (see von Hippel, 1986) trying to establish evidencethat this type of operation was possible, and revealed the details of his actionswith a deposit of a substantial sum, equivalent to US$10,000, over the onlinepayment system OKPay.
The post-­mortem report includes this event in the“What went right” list – thereby emphasizing that the user’s actions ultimatelymade the system stronger, by providing a test of a weakness without maliciousintent.
However, subsequent analyses tend to contest this interpretation, arguingthat “[a] longer-­running fork would likely have exacerbated the problem andallowed malicious attackers to figure out a systematic way to create double-­spend transactions,” and pointing out that other exchanges or payment servicesmight have taken even longer to upgrade their clients (or disable transactions) infar more adversarial contexts (Naranayan, 2015).The principal arena of negotiation of a possible solution was the bitcoin-devInternet relay chat (IRC) channel, where most core developers quickly gathered.The central controversial issue was which one of the two blockchains should besupported – knowing that a choice needed to be made, and as soon as possible.The 0.8-supporting blockchain had to its advantage more computing power-­pernode than the 0.7 one: nodes were fewer, but more powerful.
However, asButerin (2013) explains, legitimizing the chain based on 0.8 would have imposeda heavier burden on a lot more users: “thousands of users on 0.7 would be forcedto upgrade in order to use Bitcoin at all, something which would not happen ifthe 0.7 fork took over since both versions of bitcoind can read it.” Time was alsoof the essence, and a resolution would have been reached faster with a fewpowerful actors putting their weight behind the return to 0.7, instead of a moretime-­consuming distributed response involving the entire community.
As developer Pieter Wuille pointed out in the chat discussions: “we _cannot_ get everyGoverning what wasn’t meant to be governed   141bitcoin user in the world to now instantly switch to 0.8 so no, we need to rollback to the 0.7 chain” (Naranayan, 2015).
For these reasons, consensus waseventually reached on downgrading to 0.7.What was needed at this point for the decision to be enforced was that mostmajor actors in the community decided to support 0.7 – those with dedicated computing resources, and widespread user trust.
The bitcoin-­dev IRC channel becamethe place where developers deployed, to put it in Callon’s (1986) terms, mechanisms of intéressement and enrollment vis-à-vis core miners, mining pool operators, and merchants.
A defining factor in both Buterin and Naranayan’s accountsappears to be the decision of mining pool operator BTCGuild, in particular, toproceed with the downgrade.
At some point, the operator points out how it has thecomputing capacity to end the incident: “I can single handedly put 0.7 back to themajority hash power.
I just need confirmation that thats [sic] what should be done.”This was confirmed shortly thereafter by several developers.
Most exchange anddeposit platforms proceeded to shut down their deposits, updated their servers tothe 0.7-led blockchain, and returned to operation.
Interestingly, in the IRC messagethat basically summarizes instructions from developers to Bitcoin actors andeffectively ends the emergency, the central role of BTCGuild is cited by developerWuille as the reason that the 0.7 downgrade is indeed the good choice and networkactivities will indeed be back in order soon because of sheer computational power,because BTCGuild has rallied behind it: “If you’re a miner, please do not mine on0.8 code.
Stop, or switch back to 0.7.
BTCGuild is switching to 0.7, so the oldchain will get a majority hash rate soon” (Naranayan, 2015).
The switch in hashpower shortly followed, as Buterin (2013) reports:At about 03:30 the tipping point came.
The 0.7 chain quickly caught up tobeing only 10 blocks behind, then 8 blocks, and at 06:19 both chains converged to the same length at block 225454, leading to nearly all remainingminers abandoning the other.The incident was over, and the involuntary fork repaired – but not before providing some enlightening indications on how power is co-­constructed in Bitcoin.The incident revealed the nodes of authority, power, and hierarchy in the highlydistributed system, the degree to which the system is characterized by the intersection of the technical and political.More precisely, Bitcoin’s involuntary fork unveils a number of dynamicsillustrating at least three aspects of governance in Bitcoin, and more broadly inblockchain-­based distributed environments.
First, we observe how individualleadership/initiative and community consensus-building were both central tosolving a moment of tension and controversy that could have led to Bitcoin’sdemise.
“Classical” decision-­making processes, made of the dialogue betweenthe individual and the collective, are appearing for the blockchain.
However, wecan also observe the inherent power asymmetries between actors that underliethe blockchain’s functioning: most notably, the asymmetry between a multitudeof users and a small oligarchy of mining pools.142   F.
Musiani et al.Second, this case illustrates that what made the fork “just” an incident, ratherthan an enduring hard fork or a permanent damage to the system, was the combination of a human “semi-­centralization” or centralization tout court in theresponse to the risk, and a decentralization of the blockchain itself that remainedcompatible with this human action.
The existence of a decentralized blockchainpresupposes an infrastructure whose maintenance, and whose “care,” needs to berecentralized somehow, and draws inspiration from mechanisms of governancethat are able to engage a variety of actors (users, miners, developers) butcoordinate according to well-known dynamics typical of open-source communities such as the “benevolent dictator.”Third and last, this event underlines the materiality of Bitcoin’s infrastructureas a governance tool.
With its complex ecosystem of intermediaries, mediations,and control points, this “governance by infrastructure” is evident in both thecause of the incident (a change in the type of database used to store results hasunintended consequences for the organization of the community and the value ofthe currency) and its solution (an actor that is “powerful” in terms of computingpower is capable of single-­handedly bringing the controversy to a stabilizedpoint, if not to an end).The shutdown of MtGoxThe shutdown of the MtGox platform provides an opportunity to investigate thegovernance mechanisms underlying Bitcoin exchange from another point ofview.
Contrary to the case of the “fork,” governance uncertainties here do notconcern the core of the system, the blockchain, but rather one of the intermediaries with the rest of the economy.
MtGox was a major actor of the Bitcoin ecosystem during its rise, and the troubles it encountered offer fruitful insights intoissues of governance associated with the specific position of key intermediaries.Online press articles make it possible to reconstruct a short history of MtGoxfrom its emergence to its downfall.8 MtGox was created in 2007 by an Internetinnovator named Jed McCaleb.
Only in July 2010 did it become a full-­fledgedplatform for the exchange of Bitcoins into money.
In 2011, the platform waspurchased by another Internet entrepreneur, Mark Karpelès.
Karpelès developedMtGox during the period where Bitcoin experienced its tremendous success,starting in 2011 with an exchange rate of $1 and reaching $1,000 at the end of2013.
MtGox then played a central role in the Bitcoin market, capturing at itspeak 80 percent of the global exchange.
The platform is also partly associatedwith the collapse following this euphoria phase, in which a series of jolts led theBitcoin exchange rate to around $250 at the beginning of 2015.
MtGox’s bankruptcy in February 2014 was a milestone in a long descent punctuated by crises,crashes, and bounces.
Yet the platform had encountered a number of troublesmuch earlier: between 2011 and 2014, a series of problems mixing up the technical, legal, and economic dimensions occurred.
Here, we will examine four episodes emphasizing issues of governance posed to intermediaries in an ecosystemorganized around the Bitcoin blockchain.Governing what wasn’t meant to be governed   143The first episode is known as the “Dwolla” case.
In May 2013, the US financial authorities urged Dwolla, an e-business for payment and money transfer, tostop transacting with “Mutum Sigillum LLC.” This company was a subsidiary ofMtGox, serving as an intermediary to operate transactions between Dwolla andMtGox.
Customers would use their Dwolla account to circulate money to theMutum Sigillum LLC account, where they were in turn circulated to the platform to convert dollars into Bitcoins.
The bridging of Dwolla (headquartered inthe US) and MtGox (domiciliated in Japan) through Mutum Sigillum LLC wasproblematic for US federal authorities as it enacted the systematic and massivecirculation of currencies at the international level that had never been declared assuch to the authorities.
In other words, it breached Amer­ican law on “unlicensedmoney transmitting business.” This is a classical case of conflict with economicactors operating through electronic media at the borders of national territories ina borderless Internet, rather than within national borders and subject to domesticregulations that are often plagued by loopholes.
The scenario described in thepress involves all the characteristics of a typical situation of conflict (Siluk,2013): a regulation attempt,9 a contestable financial arrangement with shell companies, a judge, a warrant, and, in the end, a heavy financial penalty.
Indeed, inAugust 2013, the case ended with a seizure of $2,900,000 from the Mutum Sigillum LLC account by the US government, a penalty that contributed to the deterioration of the financial position of MtGox (Spaven, 2013).
In this context,governance – in a “classical” way – is reduced to compliance with regulation.A second instance reflecting important dynamics of governance is when MtGoxencounters technical problems hindering the normal flow of transactions.
This iswhat happened in November 2013, when exchanges on MtGox were temporarilyslowed down or even paralyzed by a technical failure that was later described as adenial-­of-service (DoS) attack.
These interruptions of market functioning usuallytrigger two reactions: on the one hand, users gather information or express theirdiscontent in Internet forums; on the other hand, the online press echoes theproblem and indulges in diagnosis attempts.10 Both processes enable the activationof public spaces associated with the market as locations where technical and economic conflicts can be expressed – and, sometimes, fixed.Furthermore, such processes enact mechanisms of governance that are at thesame time generic and very telling about Bitcoin’s peculiarities.
They are genericto the extent that appealing to this kind of arena constitutes a usual means tofoster public debate on the modalities of organization of global markets.
Thenotion of “hybrid forum” can be mobilized to apprehend the modalities of governance that are at stake (Callon et al., 2002).
Yet these processes of communication are also symptomatic of Bitcoin, not only because online forums andonline press have played a major role in spreading practices and uses associatedwith the electronic money (Mallard et al., 2014), but also because this modalityof intervention in the market builds on the effects of transparency of the transactions that are specific of its functioning.
Notably, in these online debates,actors evoke the discrepancy between information on transactions given on theplatform and in the blockchain.
For instance, on November 18, 2013, a user144   F.
Musiani et al.posted the following question on one of the main Bitcoin forums: “I just withdrewsome BTC from Mt Gox to address 1Mvk4YAtKZAP43wEhZ6ZQrTzLZwZzPxtTJ, transaction id 3dfa979af56ff061efbceed0dd7c9dc9fd8c774249544018f6bbf646323ff03b, but didn’t receive the coins and the transaction isn’t in thechain.
Should I be worried?”11 The modalities of traceability enabled by the blockchain – that is, the very fact that anyone can examine the public ledger of transactions and verify whether an order is recorded or not – provide peculiar resourcesfor governance processes based on communication in the market.A third emblematic episode occurred in the turmoil of the collapse of MtGox.At the beginning of February 2014, the platform encountered significant newtroubles characterized initially by a delay in the execution of money withdrawaland, ultimately, by the complete interruption of this service.
In a first step, themarket as a whole is disturbed and exchange prices go up and down erratically,raising the fear of a domino effect (Kate, 2014).
The signs of a technical failureof the platform accumulate, and MtGox issues a series of press releases receivedby market actors as less and less comforting and credible.
In these declarations,Mark Karpelès indicates that a problem of “malleability” of the Bitcoin moneymight be at the origin of the failure, a problem that the platform staff and Bitcoindevelopers would be jointly trying to fix (Martinez, 2014).
This argument isinteresting because it shows an attempt to shift the problem and to allocate theresponsibility of the MtGox failure to a weakness that would be inherent toBitcoin.
Many in the Bitcoin community regarded this attempt as an insult to theelectronic money.
Above all, this attempt to allocate responsibility to the technical underpinnings of Bitcoin proved unconvincing, particularly as it becameevident that the troubles encountered by MtGox would not propagate to otheractors in the Bitcoin ecosystem.
The fact that instability would not spreadbecame obvious in the last transaction recorded on the platform around February20, at a moment when it displayed a rate of $110 for 1 Bitcoin, while other platforms maintained a rate around $500 (Kinsley, 2014a).
In the end, MtGox collapsed without dragging down the rest of the market.
The exact reason of thiscollapse remained an object of speculation during the following months.
One ofthe scenarios that emerged during the crash and was confirmed much later (Mott,2015), involves a technical failure in the platform rather than the Bitcoinprotocol.
A “leak” in the exchange had slowly caused 750,000 Bitcoins beingstolen, and was discovered only at the beginning of 2014.
What is important forour analysis is that the capacity to enact boundary work between what belongs tothe blockchain and what belongs to an intermediary actor is a component of thedynamics of governance that are at stake here.Let us finally move to the end of the story of MtGox, and examine a last interesting modality of governance for Bitcoin intermediaries.
The episode occurs onFebruary 24, 2014, when trading on the platform is almost stopped.
Mark Karpelès takes account of the defeat of the battle by resigning from the board of theBitcoin Foundation (Southhurst, 2014).12 Thus, he publicly admits to the disconnect between the trajectory followed by the platform and the new ventures ofBitcoin innovators.
This action echoes a public statement made in the sameGoverning what wasn’t meant to be governed   145period by six leaders of the Bitcoin industry (Blockchain.info, Coinbase, Kraken,Bitstamp, BTC China, and Circle) to break ranks with MtGox (Titcomb, 2014).The text of the declaration clearly shows the wish to prevent any interlinkagebetween the fate of MtGox and the future of Bitcoin:This tragic violation of the trust of users of MtGox was the result of one’scompany actions and does not reflect the resilience or value of bitcoin andthe digital currency industry.
(…) As with any new industry, there arecertain bad actors that need to be weeded out, and this is what we are seeingtoday.The public display of the exit of one of the members of the coalition supportingthe market, and the claim of a disconnect between what happened to MtGox andwhat other Bitcoin intermediaries do, comes under a modality of governancethat, as is the case for the first episode, is quite generic: simply restoring confidence in the Bitcoin market.Silk RoadOur third case study links Bitcoin history to a digital market on the “dark web,”the Silk Road, and addresses the issue of responsibility allocation within thisplatform.
This case illustrates the large number of intermediaries involved in amarket that exclusively accepted Bitcoins for exchange.
More specifically, thiscase addresses the role of public authorities facing an outlaw website market.The original Silk Road was a peer-­to-peer commerce website, like eBay orAmazon, connecting providers and customers through a transaction infrastructure platform and financed by commission on sales.
Unlike other digital marketplaces, Silk Road was novel in that its only accepted currency was Bitcoin andthe transaction is operated through TOR, the peer-to-peer network enablinganonymous communication.
Together, these traits were supposed to provideanonymity of actors and transactions, two major advantages given the specificityof proposed goods: drugs, in their great majority, with a choice of 13.000 drugsincluding LSD, but also computer-­hacking services, malicious software, fakepassports, credit card statements, and perhaps even, according to the FBI complaint,13 murder for hire.Silk Road (SR) ran between January 2011 and October 2013, before its shutdown when Ross William Ulbricht, the alleged owner and inventor of the site,was arrested by the US Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Despite pleading notguilty, Ulbricht was sentenced to perpetuity in May 2015.
As our previous casestudy, this one relies on three data resources: a study of press material, with particular attention to the magazine Wired, which followed this story closely,14debates on the Bitcoin forum, and case documents online.15From its inception, Silk Road presented itself as an activist system, advocating the libertarian philosophy of the Austrian school of free market economics;it claimed its continuity with the Bitcoin paradigm, distrustful against public146   F.
Musiani et al.market policy.
Silk Road explicitly promoted a libertarian model of market connecting directly supply and demand for products wrongly prohibited by governments.
Its founder considered that people are free to use drugs to the extent thattheir consuming does not disturb anyone.
The website argued, in its terms ofservice (Chen, 2011), that it banished anything that may cause harm (althoughthe status of particular weapons’ trade remained ambiguous).This libertarian discourse was favorably received within the Bitcoin community.
As explained in one of the first articles devoted to Silk Road16 in June2011:Since it launched this February, Silk Road has represented the most complete implementation of the Bitcoin vision.
Many of its users come fromBitcoin’s Utopian geek community and see Silk Road as more than just aplace to buy drugs.(Chen, 2011)Ulbricht, interviewed right before his arrest, asserted that he had “an importantmessage for the world”: “The people now can control the flow and distributionof information and the flow of money.
Sector by sector the State is being cut outof the equation and power is being returned to the individual” (Greenberg,2013a).
On the Bitcoin forum, this discourse seems successful: some commentators present Ulbricht as a “hero,” “our own Che Guevara,” “a name [that] willlive [on] among the greatest men and women in history as a soldier of justiceand freedom,” and so on.17However, as was highlighted by police investigations, this “perfect” marketmodel, driving out intermediaries and chasing out state interventions, acting inthe sole hands of direct players, was mostly a thought experiment and unable tooperate on its own.
Indeed, such a web market actually needed a strong governance model and involved a multiplicity of actors.
Not only did the three-­yearlong police work shed light on Silk Road’s functioning, but it contributed toshape it as the investigation procedures unfolded.The first and central question asked by the agencies, such as the US FBI,investigating Silk Road since the summer of 2011: who was responsible for theillicit trafficking on the website? Buyers and sellers, in line with Silk Road philosophy? The first were easy to find for investigators, who only needed to offerproducts at a good price to entice them – and all over the world, lawsuits werefiled against them.
Sellers, however, were more difficult – albeit not impossible– to identify: according to the press, national police was able to locate andpursue vendors in more than ten different countries, including the United States,Australia, Europe, and Israel.
Amer­ican police wanted more and looked for the“inner circle” of the Silk Road.
Investigators explored in all its dimensions thefunctioning of Silk Road and highlighted the chain of intermediaries required forconducting, under appropriate conditions, a “direct transaction.” In the police’ssteps, we identify the issue of responsibility allocation in three points.
The firstdimension concerns the banking system able to facilitate Bitcoin use and regulateGoverning what wasn’t meant to be governed   147currency exchanges.
The second dimension leads us to the technical infrastructures of Silk Road, de facto controlled by a central authority.
The third dimension focuses on the specific Silk Road market rules and their application,concerning dispute resolution, regulation of forbidden goods, competition management, and so on.Concerning the banking aspects, police investigations show that Silk Roadneeded a specific system and could not rely entirely on the Bitcoin protocol; anew service layer was implemented with different functions.
First, Silk Roadacted as a bank or, more exactly, as an escrow.
As was explained in June 2011on the main Bitcoin forum,18 Silk Road deposits protected buyers and sellersagainst scammers as the money deposited into a Silk Road account was sent tothe seller only when the transaction was satisfactorily completed.
As a trustedthird party, Silk Road acted as an “obligatory passage point,” which implies acentralized system of control.
The police investigations concluded that theescrow account was controlled directly and exclusively by Ulbricht.
The FBIheld him liable for a first level of responsibility and he was personally chargedfor money laundering (Count 3 of the sealed complaint19).The second point concerns the money “trapped” in the deposit account, andrequiring an intermediary to be laundered.
How could the money be re-­injectedinto the legitimate economy, eliminating the direct link with Silk Road? Animportant drug salesman, Steven Lloyd Sadler, who cooperated with the police,explained that the most optimal solution was to go through LocalBitcoins.com, awebsite that connected Bitcoin traders and buyers for a low fee.
This site organized a physical encounter between a seller who wanted to get rid of his electronicmoney, even with a low exchange rate, and buyers with disposable hard currency.
Sadler concluded: “Any Silk Road vendor not on LocalBitcoins is losinga lot of money” (O’Neill, 2014).The third point on banking concerns the difficult use of Bitcoin.
The vastmajority of the 150,000 unique Silk Road buyers (according to the indictment)were not sufficiently skilled to accomplish transactions with the electronic currency.
The FBI enquiry identified at least two intermediaries, among many others,able to support illicit transactions and prosecute them.
Robert Faiella resold Bitcoins on the Silk Road website (probably on the forum) and bought them throughthe intermediary of Charlie Shrem, Chief Executive Officer of The Company, afirm that was designed to enable customers to exchange cash for Bitcoins.
Ironically, the criminal complaint reveals that Shrem was, furthermore, “in charge ofensuring the Company’s compliance with federal and other anti-­money laundering,” which means he was fully aware of the illicit nature of transactions on SilkRoad.
The definition of responsibility is then expanded to the service concerningall the financial aspects of transactions, which indirectly links Silk Road with theBitcoin Foundation, as Shrem is one of its administrators (Hill, 2014).In sum, the Silk Road’s decentralized payment instrument could not assumeon its own the proper treatment of the financial transaction.
To function properly, Silk Road needed the dynamic involvement (thus, the responsibility) of aseries of actors who add rules of conduct and perform the market.148   F.
Musiani et al.The second dimension we analyze addresses the Silk Road’s technical infrastructure.
This became more and more complicated so as to ensure the confidentiality of exchanges both from the police and increasingly frequent and fine-­tunedcyberattacks (O’Neill, 2014).
To that extent, encryption tools, cyber attackers,and police inspectors participated in the reconfiguration of the transaction apparatus and thereby in the governance of the Silk Road.However, Bitcoin itself, initially perceived by the police as the weak link ofconfidentiality, resisted more than expected, as shown by the unfortunate adventure of two computer science scholars (Ron and Shamir, 2013; Greenberg,2013b).
Their analysis of Bitcoin circulation was quickly debunked by a Bitcoinuser on a Reddit forum.
However, as later demonstrated in police investigations,Silk Road considered that TOR and Bitcoin gave no sufficient anonymity guarantees.
Silk Road used a reinforced layer of encryption in order to conceal individual transactions.
As the above-­cited FBI complaint explains, “According tothe Silk Road wiki, Silk Road’s tumbler ‘sends all payments through a complex,semi-random series of dummy transactions (…) making it nearly impossible tolink your payment with any coins leaving the site’.” Those encryption tools werenot only meant as means to avoid prosecution, but also to resist the many cyberattacks by hackers or by competitors.
Commentators on the Bitcointalk forumsuggested that the most serious attack in April 2013, by denial-of-service, whichtook advantage of unknown vulnerabilities in TOR, was engineered by a newcomer in the market, Atlantis.In addition to encryption tools, SR, with its growing popularity, needed a wideinfrastructure reliant on a powerful park of computer servers spread across multiple countries as the FBI later discovered.
These physical infrastructures weakened the security of the platform, as indicated by commentators in the forum or thepress.
Police exploited a first weakness in seizing a Silk Road server farm inFinland.
Yet this was not enough to locate the core of the system, the specific actoror group of actors in control of the wider Silk Road infrastructure.The traces left by the uses of all those infrastructures did not permit the identification of the specific governance actors.
The FBI needed to seize physicalmaterials, such as Ulbricht’s hard disk, to shut down the website.
Ulbricht waseventually identified through one misleading use of an email address.
Accordingto Wired, he had become too self-­confident in the ability of his hard drive’sencryption system to hide his illicit activities.
Had he employed stronger anonymization tools, his traces might have been more difficult to identify.
Yet thosedigital traces were useful to demonstrate the functioning of the site – and hiseventual guilt – once his identity was spotted and his computer seized.Silk Road encapsulated various technical devices, from Bitcoin blockchain toserver, encrypted mail, monetary tumbler, and so on, in fulfilling illicit transactions.
Just as with the fork case, the governance of the Bitcoin market isencapsulated in particular, highly interdependent infrastructures.The third and last governance dimension of Silk Road are its market devices.As in every digital market, trust was central to Silk Road.
Yet the particulargoods and services it exchanged made this issue more problematic.
Buyers hadGoverning what wasn’t meant to be governed   149to trust (Luhman, 2000) the quality of products, the confidentiality of exchanges,and the good execution of transactions.
The website provided trust mechanisms,like seller ratings or, as we have seen, a trusted third party.
Thus, a journalistcould assume that Silk Road’s core service was not the commerce of illicit products, but the selling of “insurance and financial products (…).
The businessmodel is to commoditize security” (Greenberg, 2013a).
This point leads us toanother mode of governance: the rules and operating instructions, part explicitand part implicit.
As shown by Burnett and Bonnici (2003), these rules specifiedthe authorized merchandises and services but also instructions for use and termsof service.
According to Sadler (see above and O’Neill, 2014), reselling vendors’closed accounts was, for example, not allowed, and site administrators shut themdown if they were made aware of this practice.
The Silk Road site proclaimed itswill to satisfy its customers, in particular through a forum and a dispute settlement arrangement (about which, unfortunately, nothing is known).Such organization required a lot of work and a de facto staff.
As such, Ulbrichthad to hire several people for substantial salaries.
For example, ChronicPain(Bearman, 2015), a former volunteer who moderated the forum and gave freeadvice on drugs’ uses, was hired to deal with customer service, resetting passwords, consumers’ dispute resolution, and so on.
The staff interacted through aspecial anonymized forum.
Yet while Ulbricht knew everything about his staffmembers, it was in no way reciprocal.
This system was also meant to protectUlbricht in case staff members were arrested, and complicated the organization ofwork and the execution of rules, especially since the development of competitorsled Silk Road to make itself more visible on the market.
The press (in particularChen (2011), who was extensively requoted) played an important role in popularizing the site, so much so that most media commentators established a linkbetween Silk Road-­related articles and Bitcoin’s first strong growth in June 2011.The management of his successful commerce led Ulbricht to gain visibility.He spoke to journalists, played a more active role in forums, and replaced his“Admin” pseudonym with a more strongly identifying one, DPR (acronym ofDread Pirate Robert): “As time went on, the administrator became an importantvoice, the site’s theorist and advocate for individual liberty” (Bearman, 2015).According to the FBI complaint and to press articles, the Silk Road model ofgovernance seems classical: pyramidal, not to say autocratic.
DPR hired, fixedthe rules, earned commissions, animated the staff forum, spoke in the press andin the forums.
However, as repeatedly stressed on the forum, Ulbricht’s technical competencies were limited and it is likely that he was unable to set up allaspects of the device alone.20 The assumed community of users, led by SilkRoad, was hardly visible and did not manifest itself, except through the wave ofprotest on forums when the site was first closed.All those governance devices were actually under the control of one exclusive,hardly benevolent, despot.
Yet, their failings resulted in the intervention of variousother governance actors.
Formal action by both the police and through international justice systems contributed to define the organization of the Silk Roadsystem, by “forcing” it to formalize and transform its rules (so as to functioning150 F.
Musiani et al.better) and to modify its organization.
The FBI, for example, exerted a stronginfluence on the downfall of the site.
To better protect buyers or sellers, or toinsure the quality and security of transaction, Silk Road had to strengthen itssecurity and multiply firewalls through particular governance actors.
Furthermore,Silk Road influenced the collective ethos of the participants, as can be seen in thepress interventions of its managers or in the Bitcoin forum: Ulbricht had to publicly assume his libertarian position and to deal with it in depth (it seems that hesought to maintain his authority at every price, even by suggesting a murder forhire) (Greenberg, 2015b).Thus, the Silk Road case shows that, even in such a hierarchical and autocraticorganization, the governance of a Bitcoin-­based market resulted in a complex ecosystem of actors and technical devices, who were responsible for configuring theexecution of transactions, modifying the functioning of the website and its terms ofuse, and other governance functions.
In addition to formal public authorities, variousintermediaries, involved in banking or security aspects, but also in consumption oruses, contributed governance functions as well.
As we have seen, together theseactors shaped the exchanges and the transactions.
The central role granted toUlbricht thereby hides a more complicated governance organization.
That the sitewas able to temporarily return back online in the form of two successive avatars21illustrates that its existence could survive the despotic rule of a central leader.ConclusionAdopting an STS perspective informed, in particular, by the sociology of controversies and infrastructure studies, this chapter analyzed three events in Bitcoin’srecent history in order to observe the “making of” Bitcoin governance.
We haveparticularly sought to examine how structuring dynamics of governance, such ascollective action and consensus, are co-shaped and brought to light by controversies such as the modification of a technical feature or the introduction or removalof an intermediary.
We also observed how responsibility and authority arecreated and redistributed among different actors in the system.
Thanks to the“already-­historical” experience of Bitcoin, this general conclusion provides somereflections on the broader issue of blockchain technology governance.First, the three cases reveal the need for further nuance in the “technical governance vs.
community governance” point made in some prior studies.
We seeintermediaries that are an integral part of infrastructure and their agency supersedes the blockchain as “core” technical arrangement of the system.
Furthermore, behind the “purely technical” protocol of the blockchain, developersappear, in all their variety of roles and activities, to maintain and further developthe code.
These developers’ actions vis-­à-vis their object can be likened to otherwell-known forms of governance, those of open-source communities, as DeFilippi and Loveluck (2016) have shown in the more recent case of the BitcoinXT controversy.
However, in this situation, we see the developers involved inthe very process of the “care of the blockchain.” Paraphrasing the expression ofDenis and Pontille (2015), one could say that events such as the involuntary forkGoverning what wasn’t meant to be governed 151offer the opportunity to investigate the link between the digital order and thecare of distributed infrastructures, and to identify governance mechanisms in themaintenance of a “thing” – the blockchain – that accordingly shows very particular forms of vulnerability.
As this case has shown, technical updates involvedin the care of a distributed infrastructure become “heavy with governance,” asdynamic processes that restore uniformity, continuity, connectivity among different components of a system.
Yet such updates also prioritize decisions,manage conflicts, align themselves with norms, allow the elimination of offenders and weak links, and so on.
Updates become regulators of technical incoherences.
An update’s conditions of success depend upon the asymmetry of powerinscribed in a complex network of actors.Controversial episodes also reveal a number of “micro-­hierarchies” amongdevelopers, and between developers and intermediaries.
On one hand, weobserve dynamics when intermediaries are called upon by developers to helpresolve issues; on the other hand, some developers – even among the “core”team – are clearly “more core” than others.
This leads us to novel questions concerning the distribution of authority in the system, and questions the “points ofcontrol” (DeNardis, 2014) in a blockchain-­based system.
This also questionsNakamoto’s early “decentralization manifesto,” confronted to multiple realitiesof bottlenecks and tensions.
These features bring back in full force the materiality of the blockchain: where the ideological/technical discourse contributes tothe invisibility of the infrastructure that brings together the blockchain.
Yetpoints of control and tensions also unveil this infrastructure by showing themultitude of entities and sub-entities that compose it and need to attain some sortof alignment so that the blockchain can keep on existing as a coherent entity.The three cases also permit to nuance the notion of “users” at large, that onewould be tempted, by default, to categorize as “all those who don’t mine.” Wesee how, at times, all users are not directly central stage.
Rather, the representation of an entity mobilized by developers trying to anticipate their demands orneeds, according to what is mirrored in the press, or on forums, and other supports of conversation and debate.
However, an important “range” of roles forusers is unveiled by these controversies.
Certainly, “ordinary users” are there,those that are “passive” exclusively relying on intermediaries.
As are miners,who in some instances can no longer be considered as “users” in any traditionalsense, but become a power to be reckoned with, because they form an obligatory“passage point” in the network.
Most interesting from a governance standpointare all the figures in between, from “users/teachers” intervening on forums onspecific aspects to users “testing” the system in moments of crisis, not for theirpersonal advantage but for the sake of improving it.This notion of “tester” itself can, indeed, be extended beyond the technicalnature of their activities and towards governance functions: for example, specialized journalists “test” in order to better understand and explain the technical.Police explore technical architectures in an extremely careful manner, probingtheir frontiers and limits.
As in other open-­source projects, extremely varied andspecific formats of governance contributions appear.
There are the actors dealing152 F.
Musiani et al.with an involuntary fork, the actors challenging embedded “security” devices,and the actor-­evangelists.
Along this continuum two ideal-­type extremes can beidentified.
At one end, the “passive” user profile relying on an intermediary toacquire some specific competencies, yet participating in the work of creation andspreading of information.
At the other end, quasi-­mythical figures of the “firstuser,” such as Satoshi Nakamoto, whose very existence as a single person isdoubtful but fuels all kinds of Bitcoin’s “founding histories,” from decentralization to the less savory ones such as the existence of a Ponzi pyramid.
All thesefigures and their ways of tinkering with Bitcoin infrastructure add to the complexity of its governance, to certain nodes and bottlenecks that are prone to vulnerabilities and controversies.Finally, our study provides examples of structuring dynamics of governanceat play in the functioning and maintenance of Bitcoin exchange.
In the threecases, discussion on online forums can play a primary role in the resolution of acontroversy, such as in the identification of mechanisms for securing exchangeon the Silk Road platform, in the detection of service failure on MtGox, or in thecommunication with all stakeholders implied in the management of the fork incident.
The intervention of public authorities may also play a structuring role indelineating the controversy.
In the Silk Road affair as well as in the MtGoxhistory, formal governance contributed to drawing the chain of custody, to allocating responsibility, and eventually to eliminating specific players so as to circumscribe an arena that would be more legitimate for Bitcoin exchange/activities.
Collective action and consensus are also necessary mechanisms for theordering and maintenance of the blockchain.
In the episode of the involuntaryfork, for example, these mechanisms were mobilized to secure an agreementwith actors such as the mining pools, who had a dominant position in the sociotechnical configuration at play – notwithstanding the supposed capacity of thecryptocurrency to defy hierarchical schemes of power.Doubtlessly, among the different directions that future Bitcoin-relatedresearch can take, there is a place for STS approaches to examine its governance,and more broadly to investigate the governance of blockchain-­based activities.Most importantly, there is a need to better understand how different actorssituate themselves around the blockchain – which may lead us to challenge thevery fact that, in a system such as Bitcoin, the blockchain is the core element ofthe system.AcknowledgmentsFrom 2010 to 2014, all three authors were supported by the French NationalAgency for Research (Agence Nationale de la Recherche, ANR), CONTINT programme, ANR-­10-CORD-­004 – ADAM – Architectures distribuées et applications multimédias.
Francesca Musiani is currently supported by the EuropeanUnion’s Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research and Innovation(H2020-ICT-­2015, ICT-­10–2015) under grant agreement number 688722 –NEXTLEAP.Governing what wasn’t meant to be governed 153Notes1 As already hinted in Satoshi Nakamoto’s (2008) seminal paper.2 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_bitcoin#The_fork_of_March_20133 https://bitcoin.org/en/alert/2013–03–11-chain-­fork4 https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-­0050.mediawiki5 Buterin (2013).6 Ibid.7 On the bitcointalk.org forum, see thread https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=152348.08 The post (Southhurst, 2014) on coinreport.net, from which we borrow some episodes,gives an overview of this history.9 www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/18/196010 The role of the press is not limited to echoing problems experienced by customers.
Itcan also carry out specific operations in order to qualify and measure these problems.For instance in February 2014, following repeated dysfunctions of MtGox expressedon the online forums, Coindesk commissioned a poll intended to measure the extentof what the platform’s communication service described as “troubles encountered bya handful of users” (Wong, 2014a).
This operation showed that the problem in realityconcerned 68 percent of platform users (Wong, 2014b).11 http://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/16870/mtgox-­withdrawal-transaction-­notin-blockchain12 The Bitcoin Foundation is a non-­profit corporation founded in 2012 with the missionto promote the development and use of the cryptocurrency.
It is funded mainlythrough grants made by companies operating in the Bitcoin ecosystem.
Interestingly,three of the main characters of the stories we tell in this chapter have been membersof the board of the Bitcoin Foundation: Charlie Shrem, who resigned after arrest (Hill,2014), Mark Karpelès, and Gavin Andresen.13 https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/801028/silkroad.pdf14 See in particular Bearman (2015).15 The case is commented by Trautman (2014).16 Two senators addressed an urgent appeal to federal authorities, giving more visibilityto the articles.17 https://freeross.org/18 https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=28824.msg365665#msg36566519 https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/801028/silkroad.pdf20 As for “Satoshi Nakamoto” himself, there is an ongoing debate on the actual identityof the Silk Road creator (Greenberg, 2015a).21 https://silkroaddrugs.org/guide-­on-how-­to-access-­the-silk-­road-3–0/BibliographyBearman, J.
(2015, June).
The untold story of Silk Road.
Parts 1 & 2.
Wired.
RetrievedAugust 24, 2017, from www.wired.com/2015/04/silk-­road-1/ and www.wired.com/2015/05/silk-road-2/Brousseau, E., Marzouki, M., and Méadel, C.
(eds.) (2012).
Governance, regulation andpowers on the Internet.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Burnett, G., and Bonnici, L.
(2003).
Beyond the FAQ: Explicit and implicit norms inUsenet newsgroups, Library and Information Science Research, 25(3): 333–51.Buterin, V.
(2013).
Bitcoin network shaken by blockchain fork.
Bitcoin Magazine.Retrieved August 25, 2017, from https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/bitcoin-­networkshaken-­by-blockchain-­fork-1363144448154   F.
Musiani et al.Callon, M.
(1986).
The sociology of an actor-­network: The case of the electric vehicle.
InM.
Callon, J.
Law, and A.
Rip (eds.) Mapping the dynamics of science and technology:Sociology of science in the real world (pp.
19–34).
London: Macmillan Press.Callon, M., Méadel, C., and Rabeharisoa, V.
(2002).
The economy of qualities.
Economyand Society, 31(2): 194–217.Chen, A.
(2011, January 6).
The underground website where you can buy any drug imaginable.
Gawker.
Retrieved August 25, 2017, from http://gawker.com/the-­undergroundwebsite-­where-you-­can-buy-­any-drug-­imag-30818160Cheniti, T.
(2009).
Global Internet governance in practice: Mundane encounters andmultiple enactments.
Unpublished DPhil thesis, Oxford University.De Filippi, P., and Loveluck, B.
(2016).
The invisible politics of Bitcoin: governancecrisis of a decentralised infrastructure.
Internet Policy Review, 5(3).
DOI:10.14763/2016.3.427.DeNardis, L.
(2014).
The global war for Internet governance.
New Haven, CT andLondon: Yale University Press.Denis, J., and Pontille, D.
(2015).
Material ordering and the care of things.
Science, Technology, and Human Values, 40(3): 338–67.Epstein, D., Katzenbach, C., and Musiani, F.
(2016).
Doing internet governance: Practices, controversies, infrastructures, and institutions.
Internet Policy Review, 5(3).
DOI:10.14763/2016.3.435.Greenberg, A.
(2013a, August 3).
Meet the Dread Pirate Roberts, the man behindbooming black market drug website Silk Road.
Forbes.
Retrieved August 25, 2017,from www.forbes.com/sites/andygreenberg/2013/08/14/meet-­the-dread-­pirate-roberts-­the-man-­behind-booming-­black-market-­drug-website-­silk-road/#346f8d58190cGreenberg, A.
(2013b, November 25).
Israeli researchers’ theory debunked: No clear tiesbetween Bitcoin’s creator and Silk Road.
Forbes.
Retrieved August 25, 2017, fromwww.forbes.com/sites/andygreenberg/2013/11/25/israeli-­researchers-theory-­debunkedno-clear-ties-between-bitcoins-creator-and-silk-road/Greenberg, A.
(2015a, September 9).
Ross Ulbricht didn’t create Silk Road’s Dread PirateRoberts.
This guy did.
Wired.
Retrieved August 25, 2017, from www.wired.com/2015/02/ross-ulbricht-didnt-create-silk-roads-dread-pirate-roberts-guy/Greenberg, A.
(2015b, January 4).
Silk Road boss’ first murder-­for-hire was his mentor’sidea.
Wired.
Retrieved August 25, 2017, from www.wired.com/2015/04/silk-­road-boss-­first-murder-­attempt-mentors-­idea/Hay, C.
(1999).
Crisis and the structural transformation of the state: Interrogatingthe process of change.
British Journal of Politics and International Relations,1(3): 317–44.Hill, K.
(2014, January 27).
Winklevosses, Bitcoin community shocked by arrest of BitInstant CEO Charlie Shrem.
Forbes.
Retrieved August 25, 2017, from www.forbes.com/sites/kashmirhill/2014/01/27/winklevosses-­bitcoin-community-­shocked-by-­arrest-of-­bitinstant-ceo-­charlie-shrem/#242d7623242dKarlstrøm, H.
(2014).
Do libertarians dream of electric coins? The material embeddedness of Bitcoin.
Distinktion: Scandinavian Journal of Social Theory, 15(1): 23–36.Kate, L.
(2014, March 25).
The rise and fall of MtGox: Everything you need to know.Coinreport.
Retrieved August 25, 2017, from https://coinreport.net/editorial-­rise-fall-­mtgox/Kinsley, J.
(2014a, February 20).
Mt.Gox falls: Drags Bitcoin along for a ride.
Coinreport.
Retrieved August 25, 2017, from https://coinreport.net/mt-­gox-falls-­bitcoinprice-new-low/Governing what wasn’t meant to be governed 155Kinsley, J.
(2014b, February 12).
Mt.Gox meltdown initiates domino effect in Bitcoinworld.
Coinreport.
Retrieved August 25, 2017, from https://coinreport.net/mt-­goxmeltdown-bitcoin/Latour, B.
(1987).
Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers throughsociety.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Luhman, N.
(2000).
Familiarity, confidence, trust: Problems and alternatives.
In D.
Gambetta (ed.) Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations (pp.
94–107).
Oxford:Oxford University Press.Mallard, A., Méadel, C., and Musiani, F.
(2014).
The paradoxes of distributed trust: Peer-­to-peer architecture and user confidence in Bitcoin.
Journal of Peer Production (4).Retrieved August 25, 2017, from http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-­4-value-­andcurrency/peer-­reviewed-articles/the-­paradoxes-of-­distributed-trust/Martinez, F.
(2014, February 25).
The MtGox Bitcoin scandal explained.
Fusion.Retrieved August 25, 2017, from http://fusion.net/story/4947/the-­mtgox-bitcoin-­scandal-explained/Maurer, B., Nelms, T.C., and Swartz, L.
(2013).
“When perhaps the real problem ismoney itself”: The practical materiality of Bitcoin.
Social Semiotics, 23(2): 261–77.Mott, N.
(2015, April 12).
Mt.Gox lost most of its Bitcoin years before it shut down in2014.
Pando.
Retrieved August 25, 2017, from https://pando.com/2015/04/20/mt-­goxlost-­most-of-­its-bitcoin-­years-before-­it-shut-­down-in-­2014/Musiani, F., Cogburn, D.L., DeNardis, L., and Levinson, N.S.
(eds.) (2016).
The turn toinfrastructure in Internet governance.
New York: Palgrave/Macmillan.Nakamoto, S.
(2008).
Bitcoin: A peer-­to-peer electronic cash system.
Retrieved August21, 2017, from https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdfNaranayan, A.
(2015, July 28).
Analyzing the 2013 Bitcoin fork: Centralized decision-­making saved the day.
Freedom to Tinker Blog.
Retrieved August 25, 2017, fromhttps://freedom-­to-tinker.com/2015/07/28/analyzing-­the-2013-bitcoin-­fork-centralized-­decision-making-saved-the-day/O’Neill, P.H.
(2014, January 22).
The final confessions of a Silk Road kingpin.
DailyDot.Retrieved August 25, 2017, from www.dailydot.com/crime/silk-­road-confession-­steven-sadler-nod/Pinch, T., and Leuenberger, C.
(2006).
Studying scientific controversy from the STS perspective.
Paper presented at the Science Controversy and Democracy Conference,Taipei, Taiwan.Ron, D., and Shamir, A.
(2013).
Quantitative analysis of the full Bitcoin transactiongraph.
BT – Financial Cryptography and Data Security: 17th International Conference,Okinawa, Japan, April 1–5.Siluk, S.
(2013, May 15).
Why are the feds seizing Mt.
Gox and Dwolla funds? Coindesk.Retrieved August 25, 2017, from www.coindesk.com/why-­are-the-­feds-seizing-­mtgox-­and-dwolla-­funds/Southhurst, J.
(2014, February 24).
Mt.
Gox CEO Mark Karpeles resigns from BitcoinFoundation Board.
Coindesk.
Retrieved August 25, 2017, from www.coindesk.com/mt-­gox-ceo-­mark-karpeles-­resigns-bitcoin-­foundation-board/Spaven, E.
(2013, August 20).
Government seized $2.9 million from Bitcoin exchangeMt.
Gox.
Coindesk.
Retrieved August 25, 2017, from www.coindesk.com/government-­seized-2-9m-from-­bitcoin-exchange-­mt-gox/Titcomb, J.
(2014, February 25).
Bitcoin under threat as MtGox goes offline.
Telegraph.Retrieved August 25, 2017, from www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/currency/10659768/mtgox-­down.html156   F.
Musiani et al.Trautman, L.
(2014).
Virtual currencies Bitcoin and what now after Liberty Reserve, SilkRoad, and Mt.
Gox? Richmond Journal of Law and Technology, 20(4).Van Eeten, M.J., and Mueller, M.
(2013).
Where is the governance in Internet governance? New Media and Society, 15(5): 720–36.Velasco, P.R.
(2016).
Sketching Bitcoin: Empirical research of digital affordances.
InS.
Kubitschko, and A.
Kaun (eds.) Innovative methods in media and communicationresearch (pp.
99–122).
New York: Springer International Publishing.Von Hippel, E.
(1986).
Lead users: A source of novel product concepts.
ManagementScience, 32(7): 791–806.Wong, J.I.
(2014a, February 4).
Poll: Are you having Mt.Gox withdrawal issues? Coindesk.
Retrieved August 25, 2017, from www.coindesk.com/poll-­mt-gox-­withdrawalissues/Wong, J.I.
(2014b, February 15).
68% of Mt.
Gox users still awaiting their funds, surveyreveals.
Coindesk.
Retrieved August 25, 2017, from www.coindesk.com/mt-­gox-users-­awaiting-funds-survey-reveals/Woolgar, S., and Neyland, D.
(2013).
Mundane governance: Ontology and accountability.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.Ziewitz, M., and Pentzold, C.
(2014).
In search of Internet governance: Performing orderin digitally networked environments.
New Media and Society, 16(2): 306–22.8 Experiments in algorithmicgovernanceA history and ethnography of “TheDAO,” a failed decentralizedautonomous organizationQuinn DuPontThis chapter describes a short-lived experiment in organizational governancethat attempted to utilize algorithmic authority through cryptocurrency and blockchain technologies to create a social and political world quite unlike anything wehave seen before.
According to the visionaries behind the project, by encodingthe rules of governance for organizations and governments in a set of “smartcontracts” running on an immutable, decentralized, and potentially unstoppableand public blockchain, new forms of social interactions and order would emerge.This experiment was an example of a new form of organization, called a “decentralized autonomous organization,” or DAO.
The forms of sociality that wouldemerge – they promised – would be transparent, efficient, fair, and democratic.While the idea of decentralized autonomous organizations had been mootedsince the early days of cryptocurrencies, the launch of sophisticated blockchainplatforms with built-in programming interfaces gave enthusiasts a practical,technical apparatus to realize their vision.
Foremost among these emergingblockchain platforms was Ethereum, a so-called distributed “Turing-complete”computer.
The Ethereum platform is a new and expanded version of the Bitcoinsystem in that it adds a layer of software on top of a blockchain.
Like Bitcoin,Ethereum also comprises decentralized “mining” computers, but whereas theBitcoin miners primarily authenticate transactions, the Ethereum miners authenticate and run executable code.It seemed like decentralized autonomous organizations would finally get theirday in 2016, when a design built on the Ethereum platform emerged from asmall blockchain company called Slock.it.
Earlier, in June 2015, Slock.it begandevelopment of a decentralized autonomous organization framework, acceptingcontributions from the open-source software community.
By March 2016, alarge community had begun to form around the open-source framework, andChristoph Jentzsch of Slock.it published the corresponding white paper onMarch 15, 2016 (Jentzsch, 2016).
The community formed through the Slackmessaging service initially, and then launched an online forum independent ofSlock.it, calling themselves DAOhub, which was co-founded by Felix Albertand Auryn Macmillan, and joined by a core team of six other members.
Slock.it158 Q.
DuPontwas sympathetic and encouraging of the DAOhub, and wanted their design tobecome a “standard” for future decentralized autonomous organizations to buildon.
In April 2016, the DAOhub community appointed 12 “curators,” backing theproject with the imprimatur of industry heavyweights, including Vitalik Buterinhimself, the wunderkind and inventor behind Ethereum.The very model of simplicity, a mere 900 or so lines of software source code,this design was given the placeholder name of “The DAO.” The DAO wasintended to allow cryptocurrency “investors” to directly fund and manage newenterprises – all to be run on the Ethereum blockchain.
Because The DAO wasbacked by Ethereum, complex business logic could be programmed, and onceset in action, the organization would be virtually unstoppable.
The blockchainwould ensure that all business transactions and organizational changes would beimmutably recorded on a public ledger authenticated and controlled by a large,decentralized network of computers.
Moreover, because the organizationsspawned by The DAO were directly funded through digital token-holding“investors,” each organization would be, in effect, directly managed by its investors, as per the investment stake of the individual (i.e., those investors who contributed more tokens would get a correspondingly larger number of votes onorganizational decisions).
No need for messy and inefficient human negotiation– so it seemed!The DAO was launched on April 30, 2016, at 10:00am GMT/UTC (byseveral “anonymous” submissions associated with DAOhub, who executed theopen-source bytecode on the Ethereum blockchain), with a set funding or “creation” period of 28 days (A2be, 2016).
As the funding period came to a close(concluding May 28, 2016), The DAO went live with the equivalent of aboutUS$250 million in funding, breaking all existing crowdfunding records.
Some10,000 to 20,000 (estimated) people invested in The DAO, contributing11,994,260.98 Ethereum tokens (known as ether, or ETH), which amounted toabout 14 percent of the total ETH supply.1 However, shortly after the minimumtwo-week “debating” period, on June 17, 2016, The DAO’s code was “exploited”by an unknown individual.
This exploit used unintended behavior of the code’slogic to rapidly drain the fund of millions of dollars’ worth of ETH tokens.Immediately, Slock.it, the leaders of the Ethereum platform, numerous cryptocurrency exchanges, and other informal technical leaders stepped in to stem thebleeding – shutting down “exits” through the exchanges, and launching counterattacks.
It is at precisely this point that we see the vision of future governancestructures break down, and devolve into traditional models of sociality – usingexisting strong ties to negotiate and influence, argue and disagree – all with narya line of code in sight.
In the end, the whole project was disbanded, with aninglorious “hard fork” rolling back the ostensibly “immutable” ledger.This chapter details the governance structures that were promised by thedevelopers and community members involved in the making of The DAO, andin contrast, those that were observed in its discourses before, during, and afterthe “exploit.” With the term “governance,” I intend a broad scope: governance isthe “conduct of conduct” through the plurality of (human and non-human) actorsExperiments in algorithmic governance 159that are interdependent but lack the power or authority to decide and enact solutions unilaterally and directly (Introna, 2016: 19), which enables a broad set of“governance options” as risks and solutions (Saurwein et al., 2015).
In analyzing“discourses,” I mean the “cohesive ensemble of ideas, concepts, and categorizations about a specific object that frame that object in a certain way and, therefore, delimit the possibilities for action in relation to it” (Epstein, 2005: 2).
Thediscourses surrounding The DAO reflect governance through its technicalmakeup, as a deeply embedded socio-technical apparatus that permits, prohibits,enables, disables, promotes, and limits courses of action.My goal in this chapter is not to discredit the idea of decentralized autonomous organizations, but rather to highlight some of the ways that such discourses and their operationalization do and do not (currently) work.
Thus, “truebelievers” in the technology will see that the world is simply not yet ready fordecentralized autonomous organizations, or that Slock.it and the DAOhub’sversion was flawed (such criticisms were widespread well before its launch).Critics of The DAO’s utopia, on the other hand, will realize that human socialitycrops up whenever humans are involved, and that existing governance structuresare in fact well refined through thousands of years of social commerce, government, and exchange – not the idealistic, pre-social vision that arguably neverexisted.
Either way, The DAO introduced and explored an interesting technology for experimenting with governance issues and new models of society.Visions of Decentralized Autonomous OrganizationsThe DAO was a decentralized, crowdfunded, direct-management (or directdemocracy) organization and investment platform.
The DAO was the first highprofile realization of a decentralized autonomous organization (DAO) runningon the Ethereum platform (other DAOs exist, and existed).2 Whereas The DAOhad visions of being the DAO to end all DAOs, most DAOs differentiate fromone another by offering slightly different functionality, market verticals, andgovernance structures.In the original vision of decentralized autonomous organizations, as proposedby Vitalik Buterin, founder and member of the Ethereum Foundation, a DAO isa pseudo-legal organization run by an assemblage of human and “robot” participants.
The robotic participants are algorithmic rules that run on the distributedEthereum blockchain, and automatically respond to inputs according to programmed rules.
Inputs can be varied in type, including fully autonomous sensors(e.g., a digital thermometer), online inputs (e.g., a change in stock price), or“real-world,” external decisions by human agents.3 Based on these inputs and thepre-programmed logic stored on a distributed blockchain, the idea is that a DAOwould automatically initiate action in an irreversible way (all changes would bewritten into an immutable distributed ledger).
Potential actions a DAO mighttake include distributing cryptocurrency (such as ETH, for “fuel” or payment),or making a computation and issuing an output, such as triggering software orelectromechanical (or IoT) devices.160 Q.
DuPontFrom the inception of Ethereum and its much lauded decentralized autonomous organization concept there had been very little concrete development ofDAOs until The DAO was launched.
The DAO was an attempt to build afunding platform, similar to Kickstarter, but one that specifically used decentralized autonomous organization (blockchain) technologies for its operation.Whereas Kickstarter raises funds from many individuals through their centralized administration, typically for the development of commercial products (often“rewarding” the funders through a pre-sale mechanism), The DAO sought toraise funds direct from peers (decentralized, peer-to-peer crowdfunding).
This“funding” mechanism remains a contentious, poorly understood, and increasingly prevalent practice.
Later, in conversation with Christoph Jentzsch, hedescribed his vision of The DAO’s economics as a very large joint bank account,not a “sale,” or “security.” Following The DAO, through 2016–17, numerous“initial coin offerings” would be launched that continued to skate on legal thinice with respect to securities and finance law, raising impressive amounts ofinvestment from unvetted and typically amateur investors.To raise funds for a pool of investment (controlled by The DAO tokenholders), the first stage of The DAO was a funding period or “creation phase” of28 days (beginning April 30 and concluding May 28, 2016), during which timeanyone could exchange ETH cryptocurrency for DAO tokens in return.
Duringthe initial funding period, the price of DAO tokens rose programmatically (froman initial value of 1 :100) – encouraging early buy-in (a masterful sales tactic,encouraging people to “act soon, limited supplies!”); formally, the price increasewas to reward the riskier (information-deficient) behavior of early investors.After the initial funding period, no more tokens would be created; however, itwould be possible to trade existing tokens on public cryptocurrency exchanges.Tokens would be used to directly fund and control “proposals” on The DAOplatform.
Anyone with a (refundable) minimum token deposit could create aproposal to be voted on by token-holders.
Investors voted by allocating DAOtokens for specific proposals.4 Since tokens would be valuable (comprisingexchange-convertible ETH cryptocurrency), “voting” for a proposal was conceptually the same as funding it, in much the same way that projects are funded onKickstarter.
Unlike Kickstarter, however, DAO voting members would havesignificant control over projects.
Since proposals were expected to be as transparent as possible (ideally, with their operational logic programmed into theblockchain), DAO voting members would directly control an organization byvoting for (i.e., funding) specific decisions.
For example, voting members coulddecide – directly – if a new employee was hired or not by using their votes toapprove or deny the decision (or even, in fact, use their tokens to directly pay theemployee).
The level of management granularity would be set by the decentralized autonomous organization contract that runs on the blockchain, and projectscould choose to have the minutia of decisions voted on by members, or decide tohave only major decisions go to vote.
Those members holding the most tokens –majority stakeholders – would have greater influence over decisions.5Experiments in algorithmic governance 161The DAO proposalsOn May 28, The DAO officially went “live” after an initial 28-day funding period.During this “creation phase” the community of investors discussed “proposals” forhow The DAO funds might be used.
The proposal with clearly the most community support was Slock.it’s own: use The DAO funds to hire Slock.it to designand manufacture a “smart” lock system that would enable “sharing economy”members (such as AirBnB homeowners) to programmatically grant access to theirhomes to approved renters.
Since The DAO was intended to fund the developmentof this smart lock system, to be built by Slock.it, The DAO token-holders wouldearn rent on each transaction that used the system.
The proposal was enticing tomany investors because it used many aspects of blockchain technology to accomplish its primary function, such as payment and granular management of accessthat would function through smart contracts on the blockchain, in an open, immutable, and verifiable manner.
That rent was being extracted on each use did notseem to bother many people interested in the idea of a “sharing” economy.
ThatSlock.it developed a funding platform for the primary purpose of enticing investors to fund their own enterprise was, however, a concern for many in the community.
Early on, foreseeing future problems, commentators on The DAO worriedabout potential conflicts of interest between Slock.it’s development and control ofThe DAO and Slock.it’s status as potential hired contractor.Although vastly less popular than Slock.it’s proposal, a few other ideas forThe DAO emerged, including one by a French company hoping to create a ridesharing vehicle (Mobotiq), and a proposal for an online gaming system (Firstblood).
Given my own interest in understanding the dynamics of distributedfunding and governance platforms, I also began the process of setting up anorganization that would use The DAO.
My hope was that in creating an environmental charity using The DAO, along with fellow researchers (at UniversityCollege Dublin and the University of California, Irvine), we would be able tostudy real-world activities through participant observation.
By participating inand observing The DAO community and its technology, we hoped to see howthese new forms of economics and management were being used.
Unfortunately,none of these ideas made it to the formal proposal stage prior to the exploit.The DAO of WhalesThe research groups that had loosely formed to study The DAO had been collectively studying cryptocurrencies and blockchain technologies since the earlydays of Bitcoin.
We had observed many early cryptocurrency challenges, suchas when the then-leading Mt.Gox cryptocurrency exchange was hacked, Bitcoinwent through violent price swings, and Silk Road facilitated the sale of drugsand guns online.
We also observed how cryptocurrencies were transitioningaway from cypherpunk ideologies, and away from use as an online replacementfor cash.
Principally, I wondered if the emerging venture-capital-backed blockchain companies would lead to a new era of respectability or legitimacy for162 Q.
DuPontcryptocurrencies.
At the time, it seemed like The DAO was clearly a part of thistrend of cryptocurrencies moving towards dominant capital (cf., Bichler andNitzan, 2004), and I hoped that by studying the formation and operation of TheDAO, from the inside, we would see how such systems might facilitate newforms of democratic control and enable massively crowdfunded financing.The environmental charity I proposed was called “The DAO of Whales.”Running on The DAO platform, the charity sought to directly and autonomouslycare for a pod of orca whales in the Pacific Northwest.
The entire charity wouldrun in a transparent fashion on the blockchain, and through a series of smart contracts, its primary function would be to disburse funds to a scientific researchgroup studying our “adopted” pod of orcas (the choice of research group toreceive the funds would also be decided through the voting mechanisms suppliedby The DAO).
Using techniques made possible by blockchain technologies, thepayments from the charity would be automated, verifiable, and censorshipresistant (or “unstoppable,” in the sense that the system would need to bechanged or eliminated).
I believed that charity organizations, in particular, wouldbenefit from these kinds of capabilities, since charities are sometimes accused offinancial mismanagement and opaque governance.Additionally, to see how far I could push the idealistic vision of decentralizedautonomous organizations, I proposed reviving the concept of a deodand tocreate a human–whale–robot hybrid organization.
A deodand is a medieval ideathat imbued all created things with legal status, which therefore would giverights and duties to all things, just like human law (the concept of the deodandhas in the past led to legal cases where farm animals have had to stand trial fortheir crimes – which, humorously, included being dressed in appropriate clothing and sitting in the witness stand).
For my human–whale–robot hybrid, TheDAO would legitimize the identity of the hybrid by realizing its programmaticoperation and economic performance – in effect creating a new kind of legalentity.6Why whales? I was inspired by a science fiction idea mooted in the Ethereumcommunity (Schroeder, 2014), which imagined that a DAO might work as a kindof legal counsel on behalf of a pod of whales.
So, for example, to ensure theirown safety, The DAO could automatically (and irrevocably) disburse funds ifcertain programmed criteria were met, such as if an oil spill occurred in theregion.
In this way, The DAO (on behalf of the whales) would automaticallyhold humans financially responsible for their actions, and redress any negativeevents by funding appropriate countermeasures (such as paying for oil cleanup).As the original author of the idea stated, “This is not ‘save the whales,’ it’s ‘givethe whales the tools to save themselves’ ” (Schroeder, 2014).The exploitIn the months leading up to the post-funding, launch date of The DAO, numerous community members expressed worry about the security and governance ofThe DAO.
One community member called it an “experiment in responsibility,”Experiments in algorithmic governance 163and, in general, it was becoming clear that Slock.it might not be the safe shepherd the community had hoped for (Ryan, 2016).
The most pressing and vocalcritique came from cryptocurrency researchers Dino Mark, Vlad Zamfir, andEmin Gün Sirer, who released a white paper on May 26, 2016 (when The DAOwas launched but in the static “funding” period), outlining eight possible securityrisks (Mark et al., 2016).
Although these security risks were based on gametheory issues, rather than actual code bugs, given the status of these researchersin the field, and the unexpected success of The DAO’s funding stage, their callfor a temporary “moratorium” was well supported in the community.
Nonetheless, Stephen Tual, founder and COO of Slock.it (who had taken on a de factocorporate messaging role), assured the community that such concerns would beaddressed, and that there was no need for panic.
Later, in conversations withboth Tual and Jentzsch, they expressed concern to me that between the unexpected success of the launch, the DAOhub’s quasi-control, and their de factolack of control, The DAO was becoming a fearsome worry.Between June 5 and June 9, 2016, another issue was discovered – a technicalbug this time, called a “race to empty” attack – just days before the first activities of The DAO were to begin (2016).7 To address the rising tide of securityissues, and to reassure an increasingly worried public, on June 13, Tual issued astatement about a 1.1 software update to The DAO framework, which had beenin the works for “over a month” (Tual, 2016a).
This updated version purportedto address the game theory issues identified by Mark, Zamfir, and Sirer (2016),as well as technical fixes for other issues, including the “race to empty” attack.However, during this time, Tual was also increasingly vocal that Slock.it did not“own” or “run” The DAO – a fact they had begun emphasizing as The DAOgrew relatively large and wealthy – motivated to keep their role as hired contractor distinct from the ostensibly leaderless DAO framework.
Because of the algorithmic governance structure, Tual reported to the community, the neededtechnical fixes (supplied for the most part by Slock.it) could not be implementeduntil (a) The DAO token-holders affirmatively voted for an upgrade (after a proposed two-week community review), and (b) Ethereum miners approved andimplemented the change.Meanwhile, as the Slock.it team was preparing the version 1.1 update and tryingto move it through the community governance process for upgrading, the “race toempty” attack was out in the open.
This exploit would enable an attacker to utilizethe “split” function to exit the DAO while repeatedly calling a function to withdrawfunds before the balance could be updated.
The attack had been tested by a similar(but much smaller) DAO project called “MakerDAO,” which confirmed that it wasexecutable, and had alerted The DAO developers about the security risk.
On June12, just prior to his prepared statement about the launch of the version 1.1 update,Tual issued a statement about this security risk, insisting that “no funds were atrisk” (a statement that, while technically true, he later regretted), and that the forthcoming 1.1 software update would address this exploit (2016c).With ostensibly no funds at risk, and little true control over the platform atthis point, the Slock.it and DAOhub teams pressed forward, insisting that The164 Q.
DuPontDAO would stick to its original schedule, but that they might reconsider movingforward with new features and improvements until after “the deployment of aDAO Framework 1.1,” which was supposed to fix existing security issues(2016c).
Slock.it and community members thoroughly vetted the by-now immutable code, looking for the “re-entry” bugs that had been previously identified,and found none.
Besides, in theory, all The DAO funds were safe, at least for thetime being, due to built-in debating periods for proposals and creating new childDAOs, and a seven-day delay window for the withdrawal-like “split” action(Christoph, 2016).
Therefore, Slock.it argued, token-holders – malicious orotherwise – could not immediately exit The DAO.
Accounting for all of thevarious built-in delays, the earliest date token-holders could exit with their fundswas July 15, 2016.
In the end, no dates would be pushed back; The DAOlaunched with the 1.0 framework and an upgrade path to 1.1 software (requiringcommunity approval and review).On June 17, 2016, an unknown “attacker” launched a “race to empty” exploitthat was similar to the one that had been previously identified, and began draining The DAO of funds (in the end, 3,689,577 ETH, or about 30 percent of thetotal).
The first warning came from a Reddit community member, “ledgerwatch,”who wrote, “I think TheDAO is getting drained right now” (ledgerwatch,2016b).
Within hours, Ethereum Foundation member George Hallam roused keyEthereum developers and other pertinent members of the community to aninternal Slack communication channel (some of whom were already well into aFriday night).
The members confirmed the attack and started to strategize.Knowing that the attacker would want to convert the “stolen” funds into “traditional” currency, the assembled group contacted several individuals in charge atthe major exchanges responsible for trading ETH, and strongly requested thatthese exchanges halt trading.
Worried that shutting down trading would causepanic and reputational damage, and potentially suggest fiduciary malfeasance,some exchanges resisted such a drastic action, but with US$250 million and anexistential crisis for the entire Ethereum platform on the line, the majorexchanges eventually relented.
With nowhere to go, and counterattacks in place,the attack relented and the funds were effectively “frozen” for the time being(due to the built-in security delay required for child DAOs and “splits” from TheDAO).
At this point, long-term strategies were discussed, blame was placed (thecommunity excoriated Slock.it, and especially Tual), and a countdown clock fora solution was started.After the exploitOver the next month, Buterin publicly debated solutions (which ranged fromimmediate counterattacks, to complicated “soft forks,” to clean and severe “hardforks”), the founder and CTO of Slock.it Christoph Jentzsch publicly apologized,and The DAO funds continued to be attacked (and blocked through technicalcountermeasures).
The value of ETH plummeted, and the community speculatedthat an unknown individual had shorted the price of ETH prior to the exploit andExperiments in algorithmic governance 165made millions in the aftermath, fueling the belief that the true purpose of theattack was to devalue ETH and make money by short selling (some of the evidence for this short sale, however, is circumspect, as it may have been a merecoincidence).
Moreover, debates over solutions raged online, driven by ideologies that saw any kind of “hard fork” as tantamount to an existential deceit (ahard fork would conceptually, if not technically, erase the event from the collective and supposedly immutable ledger).
Even more curiously, a letter purportedly written by the attacker circulated, arguing that since The DAO was definedby its code, the “exploit” was nothing more than a clever (and legal) loophole(“The Attacker,” 2016).8 The letter writer and a vocal minority in the communityargued that “code is law,” echoing Lawrence Lessig’s (1999) influential slogan.Therefore, they argued, any effort to block the “attacker” would be morallywrong and against the very spirit of decentralized autonomous organizations.Within the next few weeks, with the political clout of Buterin and theEthereum Foundation behind the decision, a “hard fork” version of the Ethereumsoftware was developed and released to miners.
This hard fork created a special“withdrawal-only” contract on the Ethereum blockchain and moved all tokens toit.
A majority of miners implemented this software, and the blockchain ledgerwas updated to effectively erase The DAO.
The DAO, and its political vision,was dead.“Moderates” saw the hard fork as evidence of the flexibility and practicalityof Ethereum and its leaders, while the more ideological saw the hard fork as censorship by a powerful cabal, or proof that blockchain technology was unable tolive up to its idealistic promises.
For the minority of miners who refused toupdate their Ethereum software – refusing the hard fork – they split from themainline blockchain.
This new blockchain – still susceptible to The DAO-styleattacks – was dubbed “Ethereum Classic” and gained a somewhat significant following, even being actively traded on exchanges.
Over time, the Ethereum community put The DAO experiment behind them, and talk of decentralizedautonomous organizations – previously a guiding light for blockchain platforms– was thereafter tainted.An ethnographic study of the DAO governanceSeeing that my attempt to engage in participant observation research by proposing“The DAO of Whales” charity was cut short when The DAO was ignominiouslycanceled and erased by the hard fork, I then began retrospectively studying theideals and imaginations of the community through their online discourse.
Overthe following year (2016–17), this course of study brought me into contact withthe discourses of hobbyist participants and investors, amounting to an ethnographyof digital culture focusing primarily on the Reddit community (which I had previously identified as a primary site of discourse).
My study covered online discoursesin the period immediately before, during, and after The DAO.Numerous challenges occurred in my efforts to ethnographically study TheDAO.
Very little empirical research on cryptocurrencies and blockchains exists166 Q.
DuPonttoday.
The research that does exist is predominantly quantitative in nature, andfrom a socio-economic perspective.
The only existing qualitative study of actorsand communities that I am aware of is Lustig and Nardi’s (2015) analysis of theBitcoin community.
Consequently, there are very few research models to follow(qualitative research of online communities, in general, remains a challenge),and there is scant contextual data about these communities to help guide andground my own research.Nonetheless, Lustig and Nardi (2015) do provide a compelling snapshot ofthe composition, beliefs, and values of the Bitcoin community (and by extension, the larger cryptocurrency and blockchain community).9 In their study, theyused grounded theory methodology with an initial 36-question online survey anda follow-up series of interviews (with participants identified from the initialsurvey).
Twenty-two participants were interviewed, and Lustig and Nardi found(perhaps unsurprisingly) that most members of the cryptocurrency and blockchain community believed algorithms were more trustworthy and authoritativethan existing socio-political institutions.
Yet, the views and values of the Bitcoincommunity were divided and complex – Lustig and Nardi reported that the community “recognized that it is not enough to just trust in the code” (2015: 751).This complex and sometimes contradictory view of trust and authority meantthat other Bitcoin users needed to be trusted and consulted while using thecryptocurrency (especially when it came to matters of trading strategy), but thatthe technical structure of Bitcoin (using a “proof of work” network of “miners”cryptographically authenticating transactions) obviated worries about counterfeited coins or counterparty risk.
Moreover, the development of the Bitcoin software itself, Lustig and Nardi pointed out (2015: 751), required complexsocio-technical negotiations.Research methodMy research used a variant of grounded theory methodology; specifically, I followed Merriam and Tisdell’s (2016) “Basic” qualitative method.
Merriam andTisdell characterize this method as richly descriptive, emergent, and flexible.Key to this “Basic” method is recognizing that existing bias – the expertise ofthe researcher – is a strength to the development of theory, by which theresearcher works from observed behaviors and discourses to thick theories ofhuman and social interaction.Data were collected from online sources, in a retrospective fashion.
Since TheDAO had already ended, I used written traces of discourse from several onlinesources.
In my initial research, I identified the Reddit community as being therichest source of non-technical discourse, especially since this communityappeared to comprise both insiders and outsiders to The DAO.
Within the largerReddit community (organized around thematic “sub-Reddits”) I found that theEthereum sub-Reddit (/r/Ethereum) was the most vibrant and interesting placefor online discussion of The DAO (unexpectedly, the /r/TheDAO sub-Redditwas less active).
Therefore, I focused my data collection on the Ethereum RedditExperiments in algorithmic governance 167community, but also researched broadly across blogs, technical websites, andnews media as well.Data were retrieved using opportunistic search queries across the entirety ofthe Reddit platform (global searches), and by following links and leads in aninvestigative manner with no predefined scope limitations.
Additionally, datawere collected from the Ethereum sub-Reddit systematically through June/July2016 (the two months surrounding the exploit), using an online search tool todisplay sub-Reddit posts in chronological order.
Discussions of interest (determined by a quick initial skim-read) were captured as PDF files, and ingested toAtlas.ti software for later processing (73 PDF documents, each ranging from afew pages to 50-plus pages, were ingested).Once the Reddit discussions were ingested into Atlas.ti, I performed a formof “open coding” for qualitative content analysis.
This method is similar to theconstant comparative method developed by Glaser and Strauss (1967).
I reflexively, iteratively, and interactively grouped, renamed, and abstracted data whilebuilding towards categories (a form of “axial coding”).
My method of analysiswas purposely loose and pragmatic, not high-minded analysis driven by formalities.
Merriam and Tisdell espouse this deflationary view of qualitative data analysis for their “Basic” method: “Coding is nothing more than assigning somesort of shorthand designation to various aspects of your data so that you caneasily retrieve pieces of the data” (2016).
As I developed categories, I constantlyreturned to the data and re-evaluated my codes and categories, using my existinginsights about cryptocurrency discourses to guide my decisions.
I developed 23codes over the 73 ingested documents (in addition to identifying 534 illustrativequotations).
I soon learned that chronology became the most critical axis of analysis (files were renamed in Atlas.ti using their origin date to facilitate ordering),since discourse about The DAO shifted significantly before, during, and after theexploit.Given the highly decentralized nature of the underlying blockchain technology and cryptocurrency’s origins in cypherpunk and Internet culture, I felt justified in focusing solely on online discourses for data collection, since my previousexperience told me that blockchain communities are especially well representedonline.
Nonetheless, the Reddit community constitutes a very particular snapshotof larger cryptocurrency discourse, and has its own form of rhetoric and sharedlore.
As such, my study cannot be understood as fully representative of all participants in The DAO (and certainly, Tual and Jentzsch, whom I spoke with later,disagree with many of the opinions expressed by the Reddit community).
Moreover, Reddit discourse is “semi-public” and pseudonymous in nature, and oftenhas a “performative” quality.10 Additionally, given the extensive, decentralized,and often secret nature of cryptocurrency participants (and especially theirtrading strategies), there is almost certainly a shadow element not at all represented in the public discourses that I investigated.
In fact, my past experienceswithin the community suggest that a significant number of cryptocurrency usersare primarily “investors” interested in little more than high-risk profit, and therefore are motivated by economic incentives, which may also be underrepresented168 Q.
DuPontin the vibrant online discourses (with an inverse overrepresentation of idealistand polemic discourses existing online).
Nonetheless, my analysis revealed hintsat these and other complex motivations in the online communities.ResultsThe DAO provides a compelling and rich snapshot of unrealized dreams, visionsof new worlds, and quotidian struggle.
Because The DAO ended in disaster, theresults also speak to literatures on crisis and the governance thereof.
Specifically,I am drawn to Samman’s analysis (2015) of crisis and historical imagination,which conceives of crisis as both overdetermined and indeterminate.
In the caseof The DAO, there were numerous internal contradictions that overdetermined asingle narrative history, and The DAO remained indeterminate because it wasshuttered before long-term dynamics of governance could be further explored.Moreover, as a moment of crisis, the experimental goals that The DAO originally set out to achieve have yet to be brought to fruition.
Therefore, assessing thegovernance of The DAO, and seeking sensible solutions and options for addressing risk (see Saurwein et al., 2015), remains a significant challenge.Of the many potential themes that emerged in the complex discourses on TheDAO, I identified three related to issues of governance: legal authority, practicalgovernance, and the experimental nature of using algorithmic systems for distributed action.Legal authorityLegal authority is now a well-known “issue” in the cryptocurrency and blockchain world.
For years, strong (idealistic) proponents of blockchain technologyhave advocated that “code is law.”11 In the academic literature, this articulationof “code is law” has been described as a form of “algorithmic authority” – firstidentified by Clay Shirky (2009) and then later Frank Pasquale (2011) (as “automated authority”), among others.
In much of this literature, in direct oppositionto the idealistic proponents of blockchain technology, the concept of algorithmicauthority is characterized critically, as tantamount to the biopolitical technologies that go about unknown by, and against the interests of, its subjects (Introna,2016).Lustig and Nardi (2015) characterize the Bitcoin community’s beliefs aboutlegal authority through the lens of algorithmic authority.
In their analysis, theyidentified a complex array of views on algorithmic authority, and they found thataccording those in the Bitcoin community, the presence of algorithmic authorityis not uniformly negative.
Similar views about the role of algorithmic authoritywere also found in the discourses on The DAO.
As I mentioned above, theperson who purportedly exploited The DAO also wrote a letter to the community, arguing from this very position of algorithmic authority – that he or she“rightfully claimed 3,641,694 [sic] ether” by exploiting a “feature” of The DAOthat was designed to “promote decentralization” (“The Attacker,” 2016).
OthersExperiments in algorithmic governance 169in the community were also sympathetic to this view (despite sometimes beingin a position to potentially lose a significant number of valuable tokens becauseof this very model of legal authority).Therefore, rather than simply adopt a critical, normative position whenassessing the community discourses on algorithmic authority, I reference amodel of algorithmic authority in terms of its governance relations (CampbellVerduyn et al., 2017).
Using this model, I argue that the forms of algorithmicauthority present in the discourses on The DAO properly exist in a continuum –as governance through algorithms, governance with algorithms, and governanceby algorithms.Those attuned to formal understandings of law will likely find the notion ofalgorithmic authority – as exemplified by the argument put forth in the attacker’sletter – galling and borderline humorous.
As though intent could not or does notplay an important role in law, or that a terms of service agreement (which theattacker also cites) could trump common sense and legal process.
Nonetheless,the concept of algorithmic authority crystalizes a point that many in The DAOcommunity held – The DAO was supposed to represent a turning point in legalauthority, where code really does form a new legal regime.
For example,“IAMnotA_Cylon” (2016) argued that “Ethereum worked exactly as intended,”and “Polycephal_Lee” (2016) argued that the exploit was “the protocol workingas it was written.” On the other hand, “UntamedOne” (2016) argued that “wedon’t live in this idealistic cryptoanarchy world yet” (emphasis added).
For thosein The DAO community, many (but certainly not all) saw The DAO as a realization of a new form of legal authority.
Nonetheless, the subsequent exploit alsohelped expose the tensions necessarily present in the space between algorithmicand existing, juridical legal authority.Some members of The DAO community expressed concerns about this tension.Early on, these voices also included Slock.it’s, which attempted to balance thislegal tension by rhetorically distancing itself from fiduciary involvement of TheDAO, seemingly for fear of legal reprisal (and many community members pickedup on this maneuvering).
A clear example of the latent tensions between utopiaand reality was expressed by Tual in an early blog post (March 1, 2016), entitled“DAOs, or how to Replace Obsolete Governance Models” (2016b).
This blog postannounced the coming realization of a practical technology for “anyone, anywherein the world to set up a Decentralized Autonomous Organization” (later known asThe DAO), which included the proviso that “if you create a DAO … [using oursoftware] you will be responsible for its operation” (Tual, 2016b).
Somewhat moreskeptically, others noted that The DAO nonetheless involved “real people” (ledgerwatch, 2016a), which may or may not be able to “legally own assets” given theunique structure of ownership under existing law (Dunning_Krugerrands, 2016).Showing concern for the ways that existing legal authority might impinge on theircollective experiment, taxes, regulation, and liability were also frequent points ofconversation in the community.Many members of The DAO community saw their experiment as embarkingon a new legal world, and devised strategies to make this world a reality.
Reddit170 Q.
DuPontcommunity member “ledgerwatch” (and later, the individual to first discover TheDAO exploit), thought that “the necessary legal framework” for The DAO couldbe “grown bottom up … [from] within the current legal system” (ledgerwatch,2016a).
This individual then invoked Lex mercatoria, or medieval merchant law,as a model for how The DAO might find its legal footing within the existinglegal system (ledgerwatch, 2016a).
Presumably, medieval merchant law was asuitable model on account of its rough-and-ready and pragmatic way of dealingwith legal issues (medieval merchant law sat outside of more formal legal processes).
For The DAO, this kind of pragmatism became a form of real governance, as seen in the views of those community members who believed thepost-exploit hard fork was an example of pragmatic, good governance.Practical governanceOn the continuum of governance made possible by algorithmic technologies,practical governance (or governance of algorithms) is a key issue facing societytoday.
The existence of autonomous weapons, self-driving cars, and, of course,The DAO, all throw into relief the challenge of socially integrating these technologies, through forms of risk management, internal design and development,market solutions, industry self-regulation, and state and government regulation(Saurwein et al., 2015).Once the exploit of The DAO took place, the previously existing ideals ofalgorithmic authority held by The DAO developers and supporters were throwninto disarray, and the project entered crisis mode.
Slock.it and others attemptedto assure a nervous public that the exploit did not threaten any funds and that itwas “business as usual” (in the end, no funds were actually stolen) (carloscarlson, 2016).
Some of these community members saw the exploit as an expensivelesson in “real life” (“Let the DAO burn” wrote “GeorgesTurdBlossom,” 2016),or perhaps one that would motivate further development in security for decentralized autonomous organizations.
Others, however, thought that a solution layin the realization that, despite ideals and heaps of rhetoric about decentralizationand immutability, good governance was flexible and pragmatic.
For instance,some argued that this was a “maturing of the ecosystem” (Floersch, 2016) or a“rite of passage” (Sirer, 2016).
For these individuals, which included Buterin, ahard fork was an obvious choice when faced with an existential crisis of thisnature (vbuterin, 2017).In these discussions, the issue of “centralized” governance emerged in parallelto factions in the community.
Hardliners saw Buterin’s and the Ethereum Foundation’s support of a hard fork as tantamount to the bank bailouts following the2008 global credit crisis.
“DonaldCruz” wrote, jokingly, “good thing we have acentral authority to come to the rescue when shit hits the fan” (DonaldCruz,2016).
And “Eldakara” wrote, “Ah..[sic] So decentralized protocols come withcentralized bailouts now” (Eldakara, 2016).
By accepting “centralized” governance in the form of a hard fork, instead of sticking with flawed but pure algorithmic authority, “itworks123” believed it was “like saying we should delayExperiments in algorithmic governance 171democracy until things are ‘perfect’’ (itworks123, 2016).
On the other hand,many community members pushed back against this logic, perhaps motivated bysaving their personal investment stake in The DAO, or perhaps by a thickersense of the social embeddedness of technological systems.
Summarizing thisposition, “DavidMc0” wrote, “decentralized doesn’t need to mean static, stupid,or powerless against attackers” (DavidMc0, 2016).An important part of the model of practical governance for The DAO rests onthe view that it made a break with past forms of governance and that the exploitmerely highlighted the ways that reality had not yet caught up to these newmodels.
Looking toward technical developments that would create forms of algorithmic authority enabling a more robust and nuanced mode of governance, “redditbsbsbs” writes: “we can argue about full decentralization and autonomy postSerenity” (redditbsbsbs, 2016).
Here, “Serenity” is the name of a point in theEthereum development roadmap, but tellingly, also a rhetorical emblem of an imagined state of affairs, when algorithmic governance reaches peace and serenity.Experiments in distributed actionFrom the earliest days of The DAO, many community members acknowledgedthat the enormous complexity of decentralized and algorithmic governancerequired a new kind of experimental “science” (dm1n1c, 2016) to map the“uncharted territory” The DAO was entering (laughing__cow, 2016).
This newscience was understood as, and promised to be, governance by algorithms.Bringing to light this science of society, however, required both a pioneeringspirit and a new model of distributed action.This logic and rhetoric of “experiment,” “confusion,” and “newness” pervaded discussions about how action could be coordinated using a decentralizedtechnology platform.
Summarizing the tension between a sound “investment”and a “recipe for chaos,” one Reddit member noted that this kind of collectiveaction is “dependent on an experimental, first-of-its-kind DAO platform”(xxeyes, 2016).
The DAO was also surprisingly complex in terms of coordinating actors, with vigorous debates about the role of Slock.it, curators, developers, miners, the Ethereum Foundation, and the community of token-holders.When the collective “community is in charge,” people worried, where do rightsand duties fall (cubefriendly, 2016)?Coordinating interests and actions across a range of actors with often verydifferent incentives is a central challenge to designing many decentralizedinformation communication technologies, including the Internet.
The development of The DAO, as a model for future decentralized autonomous organizations, was an ideal site of exploration for experimenting with these incentivestructures.
One of the key actors in this regard is Vitalik Buterin, who hasdemonstrated a sophisticated, if at times blinkered, view of incentive and distributed action.
In his online writing, he has come up with numerous game theoretical models to assure honesty, compliance, and other means for distributedaction, which, in turn, can be instantiated in algorithms to produce authority and172 Q.
DuPontgovernance.
Buterin’s emerging and much-lauded “Proof of Stake” algorithm(replacing the now, much maligned, “Proof of Work” algorithm originally usedin Bitcoin) is one such direct result of this kind of musing.
Perhaps because it isso amenable to implementation in technical systems (a form of “computationalism;” Golumbia, 2009), rational actor and game theory have become key waysof modelling complex social properties in blockchain and cryptocurrencysystems.The exploit of The DAO, however, inevitably belied much of this sophisticated theory.
The exploit shone a light on the shortcomings of these assumptions,or at least, reminded the actors of the enormous complexity of sociallyembedded systems.
It was believed that action could be coordinated throughtechnology, or at least enhanced by it, with the application or operationalizationof games or bets.
Beneath the methods of coordinating action, however, TheDAO relied on a model of human behavior and social constitution notionallybased on liberal ideologies, where humans act as rational, self-interested, anduntrusting agents (see Reijers et al., 2016; Scott, 2014).
Inevitably, however,when governance of The DAO deviated from the expected course of events(those modelled in game theory by the designers), the social actors fell back totraditional strong network ties.
In doing so, governance of The DAO discreditedits ideological underpinnings, and even exposed a worrisome lack of managerialprowess that would typically use forms of rationalizing behavior drawn fromrisk management or crisis mediation.The resolution of the exploit, through the eventual and final hard fork, wasultimately a hurried private discussion among known individuals, and bore littleresemblance to theoretical modes of incentivizing and distributing action (seeHallam et al., 2016).
Despite The DAO’s experimentation, operationalizingalgorithmic governance in society still requires awareness of implied and undeclared social goods (Levy, 2017), and any future design will need to contendwith these challenges.DiscussionI have not written with the goal of any strong conclusions to the many contentious issues present in The DAO or the broader themes revealed in this chapter.Rather, I have identified some of the ways that governance was believed to function in decentralized autonomous organizations, and the ways that it didfunction.The DAO is an important artifact for attempting to understand emergingforms of algorithmic authority, working through practical modes of governancefor autonomous and decentralized systems, and for understanding the ways thatdesigning incentives and modeling action can fail.
Its emergence and technicalstructure formally relates to ongoing discussions about the ethics of autonomouswarfare, automated and high-frequency finance, and big data.
Despite the utopianrhetoric on the one hand, and the largely critical academic literature on the other,what remains unclear with these technologies is whether they constitute anExperiments in algorithmic governance 173extension of existing socio-technical apparatuses, or are a decisive break withthe past.
What is clear, The DAO proved, is that these technologies have significant potential for real impact and harm, and therefore ring early warning alarmsfor the critical investigation of modes of governance beyond those alreadydesigned.After the exploit, The DAO was formally shuttered, but in the conflictualcommunity response that ensued there lies an interesting coda to its broader narrative.
When the hard fork was proposed as a “fix” to the exploit, a vocalminority opposed it.
While it is not entirely clear who opposed the hard fork, intheir opposition, many “miners” declined to accept the hard fork software andtherefore continued to mine the old blockchain.
In doing so, the incentives (andcapabilities) of the miners became critically misaligned with the incentives ofthe majority of The DAO community.
By mining the old blockchain, the minersforged a new cryptocurrency, later called “Ethereum Classic,” or ETC.
EthereumClassic would itself become a strange investment vehicle that created economic“value” out of thin air (not unlike all cryptocurrencies), underpinned by nothingmore than vague idealism and a dogged interest in financial returns.In the end, I think Ethereum Classic represents the story of The DAO fairlywell.
For all the dreams and visions contained in the rhetoric about The DAO,tracing the history of The DAO left me wondering if more than a tiny handful ofindividuals ever actually believed in the possibility and true benefit of a decentralized autonomous organization.
It struck me that, like so many cryptocurrencyand blockchain technologies, The DAO might have been just a high-risk investment vehicle masquerading as a new way of doing things.Despite my cynicism, The DAO also introduced an interesting, relativelysmall-scale technology for experimenting with governance issues and newmodels of society.
Indeed, perhaps this characterization can also be extendedbeyond matters of governance and beyond The DAO itself – should we seecryptocurrencies and blockchain technologies more broadly as apparatuses forsocio-technical experimentation in society? That is, in the end, perhaps TheDAO simply did not survive long enough to work out the kinks in a promisingnew kind of governance.
Or, perhaps hype and exuberance got in the way of agood idea, whose time will come someday, which was first charted by theseintrepid explorers.In this chapter I detailed the brief history of The DAO, and offered an analysis of its modes of governance.
To do so, I performed retrospective, ethnographic research of The DAO community by focusing on online discourse.
Ifound three key themes of governance emerge from this discourse: (1) the shiftof legal authority from existing, juridical authority to algorithmic authority; (2)the difficulty of designing and governing algorithmic systems, and especiallyimmutable and decentralized ones; and (3) the challenging ethical terrain ofexperimentation with forms of distributed action through autonomous, decentralized systems.174 Q.
DuPontAcknowledgmentsFunding for this research was provided by the University College Dublin Centrefor Innovation, Technology, and Organization.
I hold a small amount of cryptocurrency for research purposes, including Ethereum and (previously) The DAOtokens.Thanks to Gianluca Miscione, Paul Ennis, Donncha Kavanagh, and BillMaurer for commentary and guidance.
Thanks for Stephan Tual and ChristophJentzsch for commentary on an early draft.
Initial qualitative research on TheDAO was also conducted by Melissa K.
Wrapp and shared with me, providingan invaluable aid in the early stages of this research.
Malcolm CampbellVerduyn provided welcome editorial assistance.Notes1 Values and dates for The DAO were initially collected through online sources, butlater confirmed and adjusted to correspond with internal data provided by StephanTual of Slock.it.
The largest discrepancy between publicly reported values andinternal values is the maximum US$-converted monetary value of The DAO, whichonline sources claimed reached a maximum of US$150 million.
Using historicalmarket data, Slock.it’s internal data showed a maximum of US$250 million, from11,944,260.98 ETH.
Due to wild ETH price swings during this period, the US$-converted monetary value changed rapidly.2 At the time of writing, examples include MakerDAO, Wings DAO, Digix Global,Augur, and TokenFunder.3 It is even possible to have low-trust/high-honesty human input through an “oracle”arrangement.
In the context of blockchain human–machine organizations, theseoracles can use economically incentivized prediction markets (e.g., TrustCoin,Augur), a game-theory setup (e.g., SchellingCoin), or even just simple multiplesignature ledgers to reduce the possibility of human cheating when reporting answersto oracle questions.4 There is also a group of individuals misleadingly called “curators,” who are responsible for the overall maintenance of “The DAO” platform, but despite their title theydo not control or curate which projects are funded.5 One known risk about this arrangement, however, is the possibility of the majorityrobbing the minority.
If a majority shareholder decided to create a rule that stipulated,say, all funds were to be disbursed to majority stakeholders only, then this (majority)stakeholder could also approve such a rule, and therefore rob the minority.
Slock.itwas aware of this issue, and designed an odd “split” mechanism for funders to leave aDAO before decisions could be implemented (which utilized built-in delays).
Thesplit mechanism was later used during the exploit, but the built-in delays preventedthe attacker from successfully exiting The DAO with any funds.6 The idea of a deodand is now part of legal lore, but with recent rulings such asCitizens’ United v.
Federal Election Commission, which effectively made it possiblefor corporations to act like people (at least for campaign spending), I argue that theidea of a deodand is no longer far-fetched.7 A version of the attack was originally identified by Christian Reitwiessner, andreported to key developers four days prior (Vessenes, 2016).8 It must be stressed that it is very unlikely this letter is authentic.
Nonetheless, theletter beautifully crystalizes the views of many people in the community, and is therefore an important source for understanding the dynamics of governance in The DAO.Experiments in algorithmic governance 1759 One must, however, use caution when extrapolating between cryptocurrency and blockchain communities, since each has its own history and values.
For example, the Bitcoincommunity is famously anti-authoritarian in comparison with Ethereum or, even more so,any number of the financial technology organizations using blockchain and “distributedledger technology.” The latter tend to be incentivized to work within existing capital institutions, whereas the former tend to want to replace the existing economic system.10 Performative discourse is an especially acute issue for cryptocurrency communities,which suffer from a well-known “pump and dump” problem.
Individuals attempt toconvince others of the value or future value of a currency that he or she already ownsa stake in (using traditional rhetorical strategies or pseudo-scientific analytical “projections”), in order to drive up the currency price and then sell at profit.11 Although it is rarely appreciated in cryptocurrency and blockchain discourses, Lessig’s original (1999) version of the “code is law” slogan argued that algorithmic permissions obviate the very category of law – not that the code constitutes a new formof law.
In Lessig’s version, if code prevents the activity in the first place (such assharing an MP3 file under a fair use/fair dealings exemption), the appropriate laws donot even have a chance to be invoked, since there is no (potentially illegal) action tobe considered.BibliographyA2be.
(2016).
An historical note on the creation of The DAO.
DAOhub.org.
RetrievedApril 7, 2017, from https://forum.daohub.org/t/an-historical-note-on-the-creation-ofthe-dao/6377Bichler, S., and Nitzan, J.
(2004).
Dominant capital and the new wars.
Journal of WorldSystems Research, 10(2): 254–327.Campbell-Verduyn, M., Goguen, M., and Porter, T.
(2017).
Big data and algorithmic governance: The case of financial practices.
New Political Economy, 22(2): 219–36.carloscarlson.
(2016).
“No hard fork” does NOT mean “DAO holders lose all their ETH.”This debate is being rushed – let’s examine ALL options.
reddit.
Retrieved April 10,2017, from www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/4op69x/no_hard_fork_does_not_mean_dao_holders_lose_all/Christoph.
(2016).
How to split the DAO: Step-by-step.
The DAO.
Retrieved April 7, 2017,from https://daowiki.atlassian.net/wiki/display/DAO/How+to+split+the+DAO%3A+Stepby-Stepcubefriendly.
(2016).
‘The DAO’ does not invest in Slock.it, it will hire the slock.it teamto build the USN (Universal Share Network) for “the DAO.” reddit.
Retrieved April10, 2017, from www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/4ij7d7/the_dao_does_not_invest_in_slockit_it_will_hire/DavidMc0.
(2016).
Ether Safe – But DAO cancelled.
We’re getting a refund.
reddit.Retrieved April 10, 2017, from www.reddit.com/r/TheDao/comments/4oisep/ether_safe_but_dao_cancelled_were_getting_a_refund/dm1n1c.
(2016).
The DAO debate and the Ethereum Autonomous Finance DAO.
reddit.Retrieved April 10, 2017, from www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/4gz43z/the_dao_debate_the_ethereum_autonomous_finance_dao/DonaldCruz.
(2016).
DAO IS SAFE.
reddit.
Retrieved April 10, 2017, from www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/4oiib4/dao_is_safe/Dunning_Krugerrands.
(2016).
Don’t wait for Slock.it DAO announcement – there won’tbe any.
reddit.
Retrieved April 9, 2017, from www.reddit.com/r/ethtrader/comments/4dtlvc/dont_wait_for_slockit_dao_announcement_there_wont/176 Q.
DuPontEldakara.
(2016).
F*ck this DAO.
reddit.
Retrieved April 10, 2017, from www.reddit.com/r/ethtrader/comments/4oif5c/fck_this_dao/Epstein, C.
(2005).
The power of words in international relations: Birth of an antiwhaling discourse.
Boston: MIT Press.Floersch, K.
(2016).
The Ether Review #31 – Aftermath, discussing the DAO hack.
ConsenSys Media.
Retrieved April 10, 2017, from https://media.consensys.net/the-etherreview-31-aftermath-discussing-the-dao-hack-8afcb52575f9GeorgesTurdBlossom.
(2016).
We want unstoppable contracts.
Let the DAO burn.
reddit.Retrieved April 10, 2017, from www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/4ozzdv/we_want_unstoppable_contracts_let_the_dao_burn/Glaser, B.G., and Strauss, A.L.
(1967).
The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies forqualitative research.
Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.Golumbia, D.
(2009).
The cultural logic of computation.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Hallam, G., Shihara, B., Buterin, V., et al.
(2016).
Untitled.
Pastebin.com, Paste Site.Retrieved April 10, 2017, from https://pastebin.com/aMKwQcHRIAMnotA_Cylon.
(2016).
Critical update RE: DAO vulnerability.
reddit.
Retrieved April9, 2017, from www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/4oiqj7/critical_update_re_dao_vulnerability/Introna, L.D.
(2016).
Algorithms, governance, and governmentality: On governing academic writing.
Science, Technology and Human Values, 41(1): 17–49.itworks123.
(2016).
Ether Safe – But DAO cancelled.
We’re getting a refund.
reddit.Retrieved April 10, 2017, from www.reddit.com/r/TheDao/comments/4oisep/ether_safe_but_dao_cancelled_were_getting_a_refund/Jentzsch, C.
(2016).
Decentralized autonomous organization to automate governance.Retrieved August 25, 2017, from https://github.com/slockit/DAO/tree/develop/paperlaughing__cow.
(2016).
To the community.
reddit.
Retrieved April 10, 2017, from www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/4p521a/to_the_community/ledgerwatch.
(2016a).
Don’t wait for Slock.it DAO announcement – there won’t be any.reddit.
Retrieved April 9, 2017, from www.reddit.com/r/ethtrader/comments/4dtlvc/dont_wait_for_slockit_dao_announcement_there_wont/ledgerwatch.
(2016b).
I think TheDAO is getting drained right now.
reddit.
RetrievedApril 7, 2017, from www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/4oi2ta/i_think_thedao_is_getting_drained_right_now/Lessig, L.
(1999).
Code and other laws of cyberspace.
New York: Basic Books.Levy, K.E.C.
(2017).
Book-smart, not street-smart: Blockchain-based smart contractsand the social workings of law.
Engaging Science, Technology, and Society,3(0): 1–15.Lustig, C., and Nardi, B.
(2015).
Algorithmic authority: The case of Bitcoin.
In IEEE,pp.
743–52.
Retrieved April 28, 2016, from http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=7069744Mark, D., Zamfir, V., and Sirer, E.G.
(2016).
A call for a temporary moratorium on“The DAO.” Retrieved April 7, 2017, from https://docs.google.com/document/d/10kTyCmGPhvZy94F7VWyS-dQ4lsBacR2dUgGTtV98C40/edit?usp=embed_facebookMerriam, S.B., and Tisdell, E.J.
(2016).
Qualitative research? A guide to design andimplementation.
4th ed.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Pasquale, F.
(2011).
Restoring transparency to automated authority.
Journal on Telecommunications and High Technology Law, 9(235): 235–56.Experiments in algorithmic governance 177Polycephal_Lee.
(2016).
Critical update RE: DAO vulnerability.
reddit.
Retrieved April9, 2017, from www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/4oiqj7/critical_update_re_dao_vulnerability/redditbsbsbs.
(2016).
Ether Safe – But DAO cancelled.
We’re getting a refund.
reddit.Retrieved April 10, 2017, from www.reddit.com/r/TheDao/comments/4oisep/ether_safe_but_dao_cancelled_were_getting_a_refund/Reijers, W., O’Brolcháin, F., and Haynes, P.
(2016).
Governance in blockchain technologies and social contract theories.
Ledger, 1(0): 134–51.Ryan, D.M.
(2016).
The DAO: An experiment in responsibility.
Retrieved April 7, 2017,from http://enterstageright.com/archive/articles/0516/dao.htmSamman, A.
(2015).
Crisis theory and the historical imagination.
Review of InternationalPolitical Economy, 22(5): 966–95.Saurwein, F., Just, N., and Latzer, M.
(2015).
Governance of algorithms: Options andlimitations.
Info : the Journal of Policy, Regulation and Strategy for Telecommunications, Information and Media, 17(6): 35–49.Schroeder, K.
(2014).
Deodands: DACs for natural systems.
Ethereum Forum.
RetrievedMay 12, 2016, from https://forum.ethereum.org/discussion/392/deodands-dacs-fornatural-systemsScott, B.
(2014).
Visions of a techno-leviathan: The politics of the Bitcoin blockchain.E-International Relations.
Retrieved April 30, 2016, from www.e-ir.info/2014/06/01/visions-of-a-techno-leviathan-the-politics-of-the-bitcoin-blockchain/Shirky, C.
(2009).
A speculative post on the idea of algorithmic authority.
Clay Shirky,blog.
Retrieved April 7, 2017, from www.shirky.com/weblog/2009/11/ a-speculativepost-on-the-idea-of-algorithmic-authority/Sirer, E.G.
(2016).
The Ether Review #36 – Emin Gün Sirer, Wrapping it all up.
ConsenSys Media.
Retrieved April 10, 2017, from https://media.consensys.net/the-etherreview-36-emin-g%C3%BCn-sirer-wrapping-it-all-up-4d6c4280faa4“The Attacker.” (2016).
An open letter.
Pastebin.com.
Retrieved April 7, 2017, fromhttps://pastebin.com/CcGUBgDGTual, S.
(2016a).
Announcing DAO Framework 1.1.
Slock.it Blog.
Retrieved April 7, 2017,from https://blog.slock.it/announcing-dao-framework-1-1-35249e2e001#.uav8dw16jTual, S.
(2016b).
DAOs, or how to replace obsolete governance models.
Slock.it Blog.Retrieved April 9, 2017, from https://blog.slock.it/daos-or-how-to-replace-both-thekickstarter-and-token-presale-models-1b2b8898d6e7Tual, S.
(2016c).
No DAO funds at risk following the Ethereum smart contract “recursivecall” bug discovery.
Slock.it Blog.
Retrieved April 7, 2017, from https://blog.slock.it/no-dao-funds-at-risk-following-the-ethereum-smart-contract-recursive-call-bugdiscovery-29f482d348b#.dt2ssoywpUntamedOne.
(2016).
Critical update RE: DAO vulnerability.
reddit.
Retrieved April 9,2017, from www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/4oiqj7/critical_update_re_dao_vulnerability/vbuterin.
(2017).
Personal statement regarding the fork.
reddit.
Retrieved April 10, 2017, fromwww.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/4oj7ql/personal_statement_regarding_the_fork/Vessenes, P.
(2016).
More Ethereum attacks: Race-to-empty is the real deal.
Peter Vessenes.
Retrieved April 7, 2017, from http://vessenes.com/more-ethereum-attacks-raceto-empty-is-the-real-deal/xxeyes.
(2016).
The DAO: Risk-free short term investment; high-risk long term investment.
Is this a recipe for chaos? reddit.
Retrieved April 10, 2017, from www.reddit.com/r/ethtrader/comments/4h80xm/the_dao_riskfree_short_term_investment_highrisk/9 ConclusionTowards a block age or blockages ofglobal governance?Malcolm Campbell-VerduynWhat can be understood about governance in the contemporary global politicaleconomy by taking emergent technologies like blockchains seriously? Thisvolume illustrated various manners in which new as well as traditional actorsand processes underpinning global governance are (dis)empowered by applications of blockchain to Bitcoin and beyond.
Examining Bitcoin and other applications of blockchains revealed how emergent technologies can be used to enhancethe relative power of some actors over others, as well as how emergent technologies can re-constitute the interests and perceptions of their users.
Parsing throughthe techno-dystopian and techno-utopian hype surrounding discussions of blockchains and Bitcoin, this volume provided more nuanced understandings of thegovernance implications of technological change in a digital age.
Taking emergent technologies such as blockchain seriously offered insights into global governance in an era of increasingly complex and intense digital interconnectionswithin and across nation-states.In returning to the central framing questions and themes outlined in the introduction to this volume, this chapter summarises the specific insights generatedby its interdisciplinary set of contributors, as well as maps out some furtherquestions and topics that might be explored in further research.
Most centrally,is governance in the global political economy truly at the cusp of the ‘block age’in which applications of blockchain technologies are ‘unblocking’ longstandingproblems? Or are applications of these emergent technologies enhancing existing ‘blockages’ and contributing to new problems in contemporary global governance? In short, a key question contemplated in this chapter is whetherblockchain applications are improving on or further entrenching pathologies ofcontemporary governance.
Rather than seeking to predict a fundamentallyelusive future, insights into this question are gleaned by examining the actualroles and impacts of blockchains that were detailed in this volume and are stemming from increasingly nuanced interdisciplinary scholarship on these emergenttechnologies.
Directions are then proposed for ongoing scholarly scrutiny ofblockchains to Bitcoin and beyond that continue to stress the implications posedfor global governance in an increasingly digital age.
First, however, this chapterconsiders the fundamental question of what blockchains are and how they can beconsidered emergent technologies.Conclusion 179Blockchains as emergent technologiesThe common conceptual point of departure for contributors to this volume waswhat emergent technologies are and whether blockchains can be conceived assuch.
Science and technology policy scholars consider emergent technologies tobe novel types of knowledge whose practical application and integration into theglobal political economy remain largely, if not wholly, unsettled (Einsiedel,2009; Rotolo et al., 2015).
The novelty of emergent technologies often lies intheir assemblage of existing applications of knowledge, as innovations ‘built ontop of innovation’ (Holley, 2015).
It is in this sense of the term that contributorsto this volume largely understood blockchains as emergent technologies.
Inunique manners blockchains bring together existing sets of knowledge, namelycryptographic and time-stamping technologies.
Their applications – such as toBitcoin and competing cryptocurrencies (CCs) – benefit from cheap and prevalent information and communication technologies (ICTs) such as computerprocessors, as Hütten and Thiemann emphasized in their contribution to thisvolume.The undefined and uncertain paths from ‘emergent’ to ‘established’ technologies also characterise the short evolution of blockchains since the technicaldesign of this technology was published in a white paper by one SatoshiNakamoto in 2008.
Technologies are considered to no longer be emergent whentheir previously rapid growth in funding and potential applications declines andthey are abandoned by their key supportive communities (Einsiedel, 2009;Rotolo et al., 2015).
This scenario certainly does not yet appear to characteriseblockchains, whose applications continue to benefit from the funding of severallarge and growing sets of supportive communities (e.g.
KPMG, 2017).
Evenfailed blockchain applications, such as The DAO, have not (yet) been completelyabandoned by their supportive communities, as the chapter by Quinn DuPont inthis volume explored.
Nevertheless, it is not completely beyond the realm ofpossibility to contemplate Bitcoin disintegrating from its numerous internal contradictions, which have been exemplified most prominently in the ongoing ‘civilwar’ over the ‘scalability’ of the leading blockchain (e.g.
Walters, 2016).
Neitheris it unthinkable that blockchain technology more generally might one day beregarded as one of the many technological fads of the 2010s.
Even the continuous support of powerful actors does not guarantee the eventual widespreadestablishment of emergent technologies in everyday practices and processes, asthe 1980s battle between VHS and Betamax as well as the more recent exampleof Google Glass exemplified (Narayanan et al., 2016).Emergent technologies do become more established in the global politicaleconomy and its governance as their practical applications become less ambiguous and more widespread in activities beyond their initial niches (Rotolo et al.,2015).
It is the examination of this expansion process that broadens the analytical emphasis from the more descriptive stress on what technologies and whotheir supportive communities are towards what precisely technologies do.
Thegrowing interest in and application of blockchains by a wide variety of regulatory,180 M.
Campbell-Verduynprofessional, civil society, and business actors around the world is indicative ofthe increasingly established character of this technology.
Yet, with very fewexceptions, practical applications of blockchains beyond Bitcoin remainshrouded in highly ambiguous and uncertain ‘proof of concept’ phases.1 Despitethe considerable hype surrounding blockchain-based insurance, national currencies, registries, remittances, ‘smart’ contracts, and payment settlement systemsof all kinds (Gartner, 2016; e.g.
Schwab, 2016), so-called blockchain 2.0 and 3.0applications largely remain theoretical.
Indeed, these potential rather than actualapplications of blockchains across the global political economy are illustrative ofthe fundamentally emergent character of this set of technologies.Emphasising the emergent character of blockchains in turn enables a morenuanced appreciation of the implications technological change poses for governance beyond techno-utopian and techno-dystopian claims that assume predetermined paths and impacts of technologies.
The stress on emergence inducesanalysis to, as DuPont succinctly puts it in his contribution to this volume, distinguish between ‘the ways that governance was believed to function […] andthe ways that it did function’.
Rather than the technological cycles and wavespromoted by some governments and scholars in understanding technologicalchange,2 contributors to this volume stressed specific contexts and phasesthrough which emergent technologies such as blockchains evolve.
In theirchapter, Rodima-Taylor and Grimes linked the general uncertainty and ambiguity of blockchain-based digital payment systems to particular local meanings ofsavings, debt, and innovation.
Their analysis emphasised the importance ofunderstanding individual choices and delving into specific legal systems, formsof organisation, and patterns of ownership.
Meanwhile, by highlighting similarities and differences with precise parallels to the evolution of earlier technologies such as local currencies and ‘e-moneys’, sociologists Hütten and Thiemannas well as Mallard, Méadel, and Musiani stressed the unique development andimpacts of blockchain applications.
In their respective chapters, CampbellVerduyn and Goguen as well as DuPont also argued against conceiving the reactions to, and the failures of, blockchain applications as predetermined, but ratherin a continual state of flux that is fundamentally difficult to predict andanticipate.A key insight gleamed from the stress on emergence by contributors to thisvolume is that particular actions enacted, or not enacted, by certain actors at specific moments in the evolution of technologies such as blockchains are influencedby the structures of existing processes and practices.
Rodima-Taylor and Grimessituated the advent of blockchain-based remittances within wider structures ofdigital payment networks.
Campbell-Verduyn and Goguen positioned the regulatory perceptions of CCs within broader and longstanding international efforts tocombat money laundering in specific manners.
Jia and Zhang stressed the longstanding roles of nation-states in the development of ICTs generally and the emergence and expansion of the Internet particularly.
The evolution of blockchains andthe implications of their applications for global governance were regarded aslargely idiosyncratic matters, supporting the Skolnikoff principle emphasising theConclusion 181unpredictable evolution and impacts of technologies (Skolnikoff, 1993: 35).
Yetthat these implications are difficult to aniticipate does not mean that their consequences cannot be analysed and understood.
As this volume has shown, varyinginsights for contemporary governance by, with, and of emergent technologies canbe usefully gleamed by scrutinising the actual impacts and evolution ofblockchains.Implications for and insights into contemporary globalgovernanceThat even the leading and most prominent application of blockchain technology has neither replaced national moneys nor the plumbing of the global financial system in the manners that Satoshi Nakamoto and many original Bitcoindevelopers intended does not entail that these and other applications of blockchain technologies have had little impact on the global political economy andits governance.
In navigating between the dystopian pessimism and utopianoptimism, contributors to this volume illustrated more nuanced implicationsfor and insights into intertwined forms of governance by, with, and of blockchain technologies.Governance by blockchain technologies and its normativeimplicationsThis volume contributed to ongoing interdisciplinary efforts to open technological ‘black boxes’ (MacKenzie, 2005) and highlight how particular ideas underlying technical features of blockchains (re)constitute the interests and perceptionsof their users specifically and contemporary global governance more generally.Existing claims that the computer codes underpinning blockchain applicationsare both implicitly as well as explicitly informed by libertarian ideas that constitute blockchain users in market-based relations (e.g.
Atzori, 2017b; Karlstrøm,2014; Scott, 2016) were supported by contributors to this volume.
In theirchapter, Hütten and Thiemann, for instance, chronicled how the anti-statist‘political vision’ advanced by Bitcoin pitted its early promoters of ‘free’markets, free banking, and ‘frictionless e-commerce’ in adversarial relationswith longstanding state-regulated institutions and processes.
In a surprising setof subsequent developments, incumbent multinational companies and governments sought to ‘tone down’ the libertarian ideas underlying blockchains by ‘coopting’ and ‘normalising’ the emergent technology.
Yet the ability to perform a‘cognitive split’ and ‘pacify’ the politics underlying blockchains was regarded asfundamentally questionable by Hütten and Thiemann.
Despite being renderedlargely implicit, profoundly political ideas were shown to continually inform theperceptions of new users of the technology, such as central banks in their understandings of what money is and what it can be in increasingly cashless societies.Other contributors to this volume also detailed the roles and implications ofblockchains in governance by emergent technologies.
Hsieh, Vergne, and Wang182 M.
Campbell-Verduynnoted how the ‘formative ideology’ underpinning the computer-coded ‘organisational rulebook’ of most CCs advances decentralised forms of ‘community governance’.
With power and decision-making spread across user communities andtraditional manager–employer relationships bypassed, individual CC usersbecome incentivised to make decisions based on forces of market demand andsupply.
Similarly, DuPont detailed how The DAO was pre-programmed toencourage investor management of blockchain-based projects without the ‘needfor messy and inefficient human negotiation’.
This chapter noted how investorsin The DAO were also incentivised to ‘act as rational, self-interested, anduntrusting agents’ by the liberal ideologies underpinning the ‘technical makeup’of this application of blockchain technologies.
The particular ‘political vision’underpinning The DAO also rewarded risk-taking and inspired a ‘vocal minority’of users to persistently stress the ‘algorithmic authority’ of its terms of serviceagreement in resisting centrally administered solutions to fix the computer codeglitch revealed in the 2016 exploit.Contributors to this volume also assessed the normative implications arisingfrom forms of governance by blockchains.
Their evaluations navigated beyondprominent framings of applications such as Bitcoin as either ‘evil’ (Krugman,2013) or potentially ‘the most efficient and equitable models for administeringall transnational public goods’ (Swan, 2015a: 31; e.g.
Knieff, 2015).
CampbellVerduyn and Goguen, for example, stressed how the particular features andactivities arising from blockchain applications such as CCs can be harnessed inmanners that provide challenges as well as opportunities for combatting international money laundering.
Rodima-Taylor and Grimes detailed the positivepotential of blockchains for facilitating remittances in manners that support financial inclusion and development in the Global South.
This first set of chapterspointed to how a ‘block age’ may help improve longstanding ‘blockages’ inglobal governance.Contributors to this volume also contrasted the normative promises of liberaland libertarian modes of governance with their actual contributions to transparency, efficiency, fairness, and democracy.
The chapter by Musiani, Mallard, andMéadel emphasised how, in facilitating a range of illicit activities, the efficiencies gained by applications of the emergent technology became more widelyviewed outside crypto-communities as controversial.
Meanwhile, Hsieh, Vergne,and Wang lamented how ‘information asymmetries’ between insiders and outsiders in CC communities, as well as the complexity of these blockchain applications, contribute to fundamentally unclear community-based democraticdecision-making.
Similar criticisms of the differences between theoretical andactual accountability processes were stressed in the shift of The DAO fromdecentralised towards centralised forms of democratic decision-making thatDuPont detailed in his chapter, as well as the roles of ‘benevolent dictators’ inthe 2013 Bitcoin ‘fork’ controversy that Musiani, Mallard, and Méadel traced intheir chapter.
This second set of chapters thereby indicated how a ‘block age’fails to provide novel solutions to overcome longstanding problems of transparency, efficiency, fairness, and democracy in global governance.Conclusion 183Together, however, both sets of normative assessments by contributors to thisvolume provided much more nuanced understanding of governance by blockchains than the dichotomised and at times sensationalistic claims of many prominent observers.
In distinguishing between potential and actual outcomes of thegovernance processes underlying blockchains, implications for the power andagency of specific actors underlying contemporary governance were also illustrated by contributors to this volume.Governance with blockchain technologies and (dis)empowermentNuanced insights into who specifically becomes (dis)empowered in governancewith emergent technologies such as blockchains were also provided in thisvolume.
Contributors reinforced findings from initial studies of blockchainapplications that certain groups of individuals as well as centralised companiesand governments may be empowered to varying extents by blockchain technologies (e.g.
DuPont and Maurer, 2015).
Blockchains were shown to enhance theabilities of some actors to exercise relative power over others.
For instance, technologists and coders have gained knowledge and skills enabling them to navigatethrough technical complexity and exercise decision-making power in becomingkey ‘insiders’, as the chapters by DuPont as well as Hsieh, Vergne, and Wangrevealed in the cases of CCs and The DAO, respectively.
Musiani, Mallard, andMéadel also detailed how specialised journalists and CC users were empoweredin gaining knowledge of the technical features and processes underlying applications of the emergent technology.
Their chapter revealed further ‘microhierarchies’ and power asymmetries amongst small and large developers,between developers and intermediaries, as well as between users and ‘a smalloligarchy of mining pools’.Contributors to this volume detailed how governance with blockchainsempowers some historically underprivileged non-state actors, giving rise to newsets of actors in the increasingly digital global political economy.
Invoking theidea of a ‘networked world order’ (Slaughter, 2004), the chapter by RodimaTaylor and Grimes stressed the ‘multiplicity of global and national standardsetting bodies, development agencies and experts, funders and philanthropists,financial institutions, fintech companies, retail agents, and consumers’ involvedin drawing blockchains into global remittance governance.
In his chapter,DuPont noted how governance with emergent technologies can empower civilsociety actors such as charities, who can use blockchains to receive and transparently manage donations.
Meanwhile, new actors can be empowered by drawingon blockchain to link crypto and mainstream economies, as the chapters byHütten and Thiemann as well as Musiani, Mallard, and Méadel detailed withregards to CC-to-national money exchanges.
Campbell-Verduyn and Goguenemphasised the growing importance of these new ‘nodes’ in global anti-moneylaundering (AML) governance, as well as other new actors such as the BitcoinFoundation and the Digital Asset Transfer Authority in providing education andelaborating governance principles, respectively.
Finally, Hsieh, Vergne, and184 M.
Campbell-VerduynWang discussed how start-up businesses become empowered in employingblockchain technologies for their internal organisation in manners that replacelongstanding forms of corporate governance.Contributors to this volume, however, also stressed how governance withblockchains can further empower incumbent and historically powerful actors inthe global political economy.
Hütten and Thiemann pointed to how blockchainsadd to the pre-existing power of a ‘priviledged tech-savvy male elite’.
RodimaTaylor and Grimes noted how, despite bypassing certain remittance operatorsand traditional financial intermediaries, crypto-remittances also empower banks,payment aggregators, and other incumbents in the ‘last mile’ of internationalmoney delivery.
Other established firms are empowered by employing centrallygoverned CCs such as Ripple to perpetuate their dominance, as the chapter byHsieh, Vergne, and Wang described.
Campbell-Verduyn and Goguen discussedhow individual nation-states and international organisations are further empowered in their collaborations with blockchain firms to monitor transactions, as wellas in both ‘races to the top and bottom’ to gain competitive advantages overcompeting national jurisdictions and global governance institutions.
The greaterempowerment of these traditional actors in the global political economy isfurther illustrated in the increasingly formal and informal governance ofblockchains.Governance of blockchain technologies: centralised coercion anddecentralised flexibilityThis volume provided further insights into both the merits and limits of centralised and decentralised approaches to the governance of emergent technology.
Onthe one hand, contributors emphasised the utility of and boundaries to ‘top–down’ forms of centralised coercion involving explicitly ‘hands-on’ governmentactions in stamping out the least desirable features of blockchain applications,such as the volatility of CCs and their facilitation of illicit activity.
Formal bansin Russia and other countries reduced risks related to the former features ofblockchain technologies, as the chapter by Jia and Zhang noted.
The latter riskof illicit activities being facilitated by the use of Bitcoin in ‘dark web’ marketssuch as Silk Road was reduced, albeit only temporarily, by coercion of theAmerican Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), as the chapter by Musiani,Mallard, and Méadel detailed.
Contributors to this volume also stressed thelimits to formal coercion in the governance of blockchains.
Several chaptersemphasised how overly coercive and prohibitive approaches undermined opportunities presented by emergent technologies such as blockchains for attending toand improving upon longstanding governance problems.
Rodima-Taylor andGrimes discussed how the finding by the Central Bank of Kenya that Bitcoin isan unregulated currency ultimately harmed efforts to integrate CC transfers intoexisting remittance payment platforms in that East African country.
Coercivegovernance responses were also regarded less as resolving than merely shiftingillicit activities elsewhere.
The re-establishment of 2.0 and 3.0 versions of theConclusion 185Silk Road noted in the chapter by Campbell-Verduyn and Goguen illustrated limitsto even internationally coordinated coercive governance of emergent technology.Short of shutting down the entire Internet, more coercive governance can beescaped through distributed blockchain-enabled activities with relative ease.On the other hand, contributors to this volume provided nuanced assessmentsof seemingly more flexible approaches to the governance of emergent technologies.
Jia and Zhang stressed how ‘laissez-faire’ responses do not necessarily entaila lack of formal governance.
Rather, less restrictive approaches to the governanceof emergent technology often still involve formal regulations at multiple levels ofgovernance.
Flexible and more ‘experimentalist’ (Sabel and Zeitlin, 2008)approaches to the governance of blockchains have permitted individual states andnon-state actors to trial various governance approaches, some of which appearmore coercive than others.
In the United States, for instance, New York Statedeveloped a ‘Bitlicense’ that the chapter by Campbell-Verduyn and Goguen notedwas perceived as highly restrictive by members of the blockchain industry, someof whom subsequently relocated to other jurisdictions, such as Panama.
Key actorsin the international AML regime, such as the Financial Action Task Force (FATF),developed a flexible approach that allowed some actors and jurisdictions to ‘raceto the top’ in distinguishing themselves as AML-compliant.
The intentions of moreflexible approaches appear less to be experimentation merely for the sake of experimentation than learning and disseminating successful strategies for achievingcommon governance goals (see also Overdevest and Zeitlin, 2014).
Yet like allformal forms of governance, risks remain with such flexible and decentralisedapproaches.
As Jia and Zhang stressed, states pursuing flexible approaches remainvulnerable to capital flight and the volatility associated with leading applicationsof blockchains, such as CCs.A further contribution of this book then was to illustrate various overlapsbetween seeming dichotomous centralised coercive and more decentralised flexible governance strategies.
Jia and Zhang, for example, identified a middle groundapproach to the governance of emergent technology that bridges flexible and coercive strategies.
Although focused on the ‘prudent enthusiasm’ of key Chinese stateactors, Jia and Zhang argued that other countries confronting emergent technologies might similarly seek to balance risks and opportunities presented by technological change.
The next sub-section highlights several intersections between theforms of governance by, with, and of blockchains illustrated in this book.Limits, shifts, and interrelationships between contemporary forms ofgovernanceAnalysing blockchains provides nuanced insights into the overlaps and interrelationships between contemporary forms of governance by, with, and of emergent technologies.
Significant limits pertain to each of these forms ofgovernance, as this volume illustrated in analysing blockchains.
Governanceby blockchains is grounded in inflexible pre-programmed computer codes;governance with blockchains can perpetuate status quo power relations in186 M.
Campbell-Verduynempowering dominant actors and processes; and governance of blockchains isrestricted by the digital and distributed nature of activities enabled by blockchain technologies.
These limits in turn can induce shifts between forms ofgovernance.
The chapter by DuPont revealed how key actors, such as thefounder of Ethereum, exercised governance with blockchains in overcomingthe flaws of governance by blockchains following the exploit of The DAO in2016.
This attack induced what appeared to both community members and tooutside observers as an explicit shift from governance by blockchains towardsgovernance with blockchains.Yet more mundane and everyday relationships between the forms of contemporary global governance illustrated in Figure 9.1 also occur in moremundane manners beyond periods of attention-grabbing crisis and contestation.In a first instance are interactions between forms of governance by and withemergent technologies.
The influence of the former upon the latter was illustrated with how several technical features of blockchains enable certain actors tobe empowered over others, as the chapter by Musiani, Mallard, and Méadelillustrated in discussing ‘benevolent dictators’.
Hsieh, Vergne, and Wang similarly noted how the seemingly technical specifications of pre-mined CCs inducethe empowerment of concentrated sets of actors.
Specific ideas and ideologiesunderpinning traits of emergent technologies such as blockchains were regardedby contributors to this volume as shaping, but not wholly determining, whobecomes (dis)empowered by technological change.Yet, the relationships between governance by and with emergent technologiesare not simply one-way.
The specific forms of ideas and ideologies underlyingemergent technologies are also influenced, but not wholly determined, by who programmes and designs blockchains.
As several chapters in this volume stressed,privileged individual programmers, frequently operating in the Global North,insert their particular biases and perceptions of the world into supposedly ‘neutral’technical designs.
Investors are also further empowered by blockchain applicationsand are able to shape, though not wholly determine, the reach of governance by theemergent technologies.
In hunting for returns, investors are able to promote themarket values of more centralised CCs with ‘clear strategic directions and organisational mandates’ over decentralised CCs characterised by forms of ‘communitygovernance’ and slower, potentially more acrimonious decision-making, as thechapter by Hsieh, Vergne, and Wang illustrated.
Through forms of governancewith blockchains, these powerful sets of actors can thereby influence the shape andscope of governance by blockchains.Governance by blockchainsGovernance with blockchains Governance of blockchainsFigure 9.1 Interrelationships between governance by, with, and of blockchains.Conclusion 187Forms of governance of and by blockchains also interact in subtle manners.Hütten and Thiemann pointed to how applications of blockchains have becomeslowly integrated within formal regulatory institutions, despite the positioning ofearly Bitcoin developers explicitly against such formal governance arrangements.
This chapter stressed the continual importance of formal ‘political authority that creates moral and legal space for financial markets to operate andconsolidates and legalizes a professional domain for particular financial practices’.
The chapter by DuPont similarly emphasised how applications of emergent technologies occur in the space between algorithmic and juridical forms ofauthority, in between governance by and of blockchains.
Campbell-Verduyn andGoguen furthermore pointed to how particular features of formal governance ofblockchains in the international AML regime influenced, but did not whollydetermine, a bifurcation of blockchain applications.
Policies and regulationsunderlying the governance of blockchains have implications, for instance, thedevelopment of CCs promising total anonymity that then in turn structure theactivities of their user in particular manners.Once again, however, interrelationships between forms of governance by andof blockchains are not unidirectional.
The former also influence, but do notwholly determine, the specific form and shape of the latter.
For instance, preprogrammed traits and ideologies underlying applications of blockchains structure not only their users but also regulatory perceptions of the emergenttechnology.
The chapter by Campbell-Verduyn and Goguen detailed how theperception of the quasi-anonymous and decentralised features of CCs as threatsto key actors in the international AML regime influenced the subsequent formalapproaches taken to the governance of the emergent technologies.
Decentralisedforms of governance were regarded as having been shaped, yet not entirelydetermined, by the features of blockchains and underlying forms of governanceby blockchains.Finally, mundane interrelationships between forms of governance of and withblockchains were identified in this volume.
The chapter by Musiani, Mallard,and Méadel detailed a range of individuals influencing, but not wholly determining, how formal governance of blockchain applications unfolds at some timesand fails to unfold at other times.
Their chapter stressed the structuring and performative effects of certain narratives that give rise to specific conceptions of thetypes of formal governance that do and do not make sense, and which delimitthe range of legitimate policies and regulatory responses.
The chapter by Hsieh,Vergne, and Wang also specified how certain traditional and social media actorspromote or discourage formal governance of the emergent technology in theirnormative judgements of the failings, successes, and implications of blockchainapplications.
Formal governance of blockchains influences the actors empoweredover others in forms of governance with blockchains.
As the chapter byCampbell-Verduyn and Goguen detailed, flexible approaches pursued in theinternational AML regime empowered actors such as CC-to-national currenciesexchanges, as well as industry governance bodies, to implement market-basedmoney laundering policies.188 M.
Campbell-VerduynExamining blockchains and their applications in the contemporary globalpolitical economy illuminates not only varying governance by, with, and ofemergent technologies, but also the intricate relationships between these formsof contemporary governance.
The following section makes the case for furtherinvestigations of these and other relationships underpinning governance in anincreasingly digital global political economy, as well as identifies further pathsthat future interdisciplinary research might productively take.Future avenues of inquiryNeedless to say, there exist numerous avenues to further elaborate the implications of and insight into contemporary governance that applications of blockchain technologies provide.
In scrutinising the novelty of the ‘block age’ andwhether applications of emergent technologies such as blockchains are enhancing existing ‘blockages’ or contributing to new problems of governance in thecontemporary global political economy, many different paths can productivelybe taken.
In contemplating avenues for ongoing research, however, it remainsessential to recognise that the impacts and insights emergent technologiesprovide for contemporary global governance are uncertain and difficult, if notimpossible, to accurately predict.
Perhaps the only ‘known unknown’ is that theevolution of blockchains, like all technologies, remains characterised by ageneral ‘messiness’ (Mayer et al., 2014: 15) pertaining to the ‘untidy, unevenprocesses’ through which applications of novel knowledge sets emerge (Jasanoff, 2004: 4).
As innovation policy scholars Rotolo, Hicks, and Martin (2015:1831) observe, understanding even the range of ‘probabilities associated witheach possible outcome (e.g.
potential applications of the technology, financialsupport for its development, standards, production costs) may be particularlyproblematic’ (see also Hesse-Biber, 2011).Rather than reviewing the numerous predictions pervading emerging literature on blockchains (for overviews see Swan, 2015a; Vigna and Casey, 2015),this section instead emphasises several areas identified by contributors to thisvolume that continual scholarly investigations might scrutinise in providingfuther nuanced understanding of the global governance implications of blockchains and other emergent technologies.
Three interrelated themes for furtherresearch are mapped out in this section: hybrid forms of contemporary governance; the materiality of Bitcoin, other blockchain applications, and emergingICTs more generally; as well as the ethics and legitimacy of blockchains andgovernance of, with, and by emergent technologies.
Each avenue proposed forfuture research stresses how interdisciplinary studies engaging a range of analytical perspectives could enable further nuanced understandings of the implications posed by blockchains and emergent technologies pose for governance in anincreasingly digital global political economy.Conclusion 189Hybridity in global governanceA first avenue for further investigating the nexus of blockchains, emergent technologies, and global governance is engagement with research on ‘hybrid’ formsof governance that are being increasingly explored in global political economyand the social sciences more generally (Hurt and Lipschutz, 2015; Aoyama andParthasarathy, 2016).
Hybridity in a broad sense refers to a range of social processes and temporalities between continuity and upheaval (Adam, 2004;Campbell-Verduyn, 2013).
In the more specific sense identified by RodimaTaylor and Grimes in their contribution to this volume, hybridity refers to‘organisational forms’ combining traditional and modern features of global governance.
Rodima-Taylor and Grimes located hybridity in both organisations andpractices linking formal and informal forms of contemporary governance.Extending this governance-specific conception to other recent efforts in GPE andbeyond to elaborate notions of hybridity may help overcome artificial analyticalseparations that tend to hamper more nuanced understanding of the complexitiesunderpinning contemporary governance, such as between centralisation anddecentralisation, as well as between public and private spheres (Best, 2014;Porter, 2014; Sheller and Urry, 2003).
Further research might specifically investigate whether forms of hybrid governance, such as the ‘prudent enthusiasm’identified by Jia and Zhang in this volume, are becoming more widely replicatedin the governance of blockchains.
Parallels might be identified between the mixof formal and informal forms of blockchain governance in China and the socalled ‘regulatory sandboxes’ set up in, as well as between, Switzerland, theUnited Kingdom, and a number of Commonwealth jurisdictions, including Australia, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, and the Canadian province ofOntario (Australian Securities and Investments Commission, n.d.; Bank of Thailand, 2016; Bank Negara Malaysia, 2016; Financial Conduct Authority, 2015;Hong Kong Monetary Authority, 2016; Sharp, 2017).
The latter novel forms ofcontemporary governance relax existing formal laws in providing informalspaces for ‘controlled experimentation’.
Formal laws are not eliminated as in atypical regulatory ‘race to the bottom’.
Yet certain products, services, and processes located awkwardly within existing laws are allowed to be trialled andtested under continual regulatory scrutiny.
The ostensible purpose here is toaccrue the benefits of innovation whilst minimising risks of harm to citizens andto society more generally.
State scrutiny involves not only monitoring, butsimilar types of formal and informal dialogue between regulators and industryactors that Jia and Zhang highlighted with the ‘prudent enthusiasm’ approach toBitcoin governance in China.
Once again, a continual ‘shadow of state regulation’ is implicitly and at times explicitly underpinning such dialogue and theunderstanding that experiments will be shut down should they jeopardise socioeconomic stability.As with all approaches to the formal governance of technology, however,risks pertain to even the most conventional ‘hybrid’ forms of governance.
Regulatory capture in both its ‘material’ as well as ‘cognitive’ or ‘cultural’ forms190 M.
Campbell-Verduyntends to be overlooked by advocates and analysts of ‘sandbox’ approaches(Maupin, 2017).
Frequent contacts between regulators and the regulated industry, as well as shared outlooks and professional backgrounds of personnel, caninduce various forms of ‘regulatory capture’.
The blurring of broader socialwelfare and the interests of particular groups identified in numerous areas ofglobal governance (e.g.
Baker, 2010; Novak, 2013; Campbell-Verduyn, 2017)remains relevant to novel hybrid forms of blockchain governance for at least tworeasons: first, because of the high degree of individual movement between personnel of regulatory and industry institutions.
A prominent case of this ‘revolving door’ in the United States was the departure of the first New York StateSuperintendent of Financial Services to a consultancy specialising in compliancewith the very Bitlicense he shaped and developed (Freifeld, 2015).
Anotherreason for which risks of capture appear particularly pertinent to hybrid governance of blockchains is the shared technical and professional backgrounds ofindustry and regulatory personnel.
The high degree of technical literacy requiredfor comprehending most blockchain-based activities can induce an uncriticalreliance by regulators on industry knowledge and insights.Understanding the risks of regulatory capture in the governance of emergenttechnologies such as blockchains requires further integration with existingefforts to identify how such problems might be both prevented and conceptualised (Carpenter and Moss, 2013; Pagliari, 2012).
Whether or not regulatorycapture is an inevitable process, for example, could be examined in studiesenhancing scrutiny of the specific actors programming the seemingly neutraltechnical codes of blockchains and other ICTs.
Whether and how wider benefitsare actually accrued to society more generally, rather than just to certain actorsin forms of hybrid governance, needs to be continually scrutinised as ‘regulatorysandboxes’ gain in popularity (Aitken, 2016; Sharp, 2017).
Finally, whether concepts like ‘regulatory capture’ are themselves sufficient for conceiving the intricacies of symbiotic relationships between regulatory and industry actors can beelaborated in taking the governance of emergent technologies such as blockchains seriously.The materiality of blockchains and digital technologiesHütten and Thiemann concluded their contribution in this volume with the provocative claim that the most lasting contribution of CCs may be returning a focus tolongstanding debates on the materiality of money, as well as advancing new perspectives on the roles of monetary governance in increasingly cashless societies.Further interrogations of the wider governance implications of the ‘practical materiality’ (Maurer et al., 2013) and ‘material embeddedness’ (Karlstrøm, 2014) ofCCs can provide fruitful insights into contemporary forms of global governance,as Campbell-Verduyn and Goguen as well as Musiani, Mallard, and Méadelrevealed in this volume with their respective focus on the ‘socio-technical environments’ in which international regimes operate and the technical ‘Internet infrastructure and infrastructure as Internet politics’.
Specifically, exploring questionsConclusion 191of materiality might help understand whether CCs can be understood as ‘“hybrids”of conventional money’ (Leander, 2015: 951–2), as Hütten and Thiemann discussed in their contribution to this volume.
Elaborating such insights on CCs mayin turn more widely inform scholars, policy-makers, businesses, and the generalpublic on the evolving nature of conventional currencies, and specifically whetheror not CCs and other electronic monetary tokens are transforming conventionalmoney ‘from within’ (ibid.).The material contexts in which CCs have arisen and blockchain applicationsare being developed might be further investigated in several manners.
Forexample, future studies could interrogate whether the actors and processes associated with modes of ‘platformisation’ identified by Rodima-Taylor and Grimesare replacing, adding onto, or combining existing governance infrastructures.How might new and old material infrastructures be interacting with the forms ofgovernance underpinning what GPE scholars haved identified as ‘platform capitalism’ (Langley and Leyshon, 2016)? Recent efforts in GPE and the wider socialsciences to return to the longstanding scrutiny of the material infrastructuresenabling market activities and their governance could productively be extendedto the governance of, with, and by blockchains (e.g.
Cerny, 1994; Edwards,2003; Jeffs, 2008; Maurer and Swartz, 2017; Musiani et al., 2016; Star, 1999).Another avenue for further investigating the materiality of CCs and otherapplications of blockchain technologies is their interrelationship with the naturalenvironment.
As with most commentary on blockchain applications, the environmental implications of CCs have attracted sensationalist headlines in media outlets.For instance, Bitcoin mining has been likened to an ‘unsustainable’ (Malmo, 2015)‘real-world environmental disaster’ (Gimein, 2013; see also The Economist, 2015).Some nuanced and more detailed analysis has compared the considerable computing power required to verify and maintain Bitcoin transactions in particular (Hayes,2015)3 with nearly the annual energy consumption of countries such as Ireland andParaguay.
Such environmental impacts might stem from the physical location ofCC mining ‘farms’ in regions where electricity is cheap yet environmentallyunfriendly, such as coal power in western China and eastern Ukraine.
Thesematerial impacts might, however, also be due to the specific design of the leadingCC.
Do Bitcoin competitors such as Solarcoin truly reduce the environmentalimpacts of CCs, and if so, how exactly? How does the energy consumption of CCscompare with that of more traditional payment systems (e.g.
Malmo, 2017)? Whilesome scholars have begun to address the environmental ‘dark side’ of CCs(Carney, 2013; e.g.
McCook, 2014; O’Dwyer and Malone, 2014), much remainsto be done before any conclusive claims can be made regarding the impacts ofthese and other applications of blockchain technologies.
In addressing the materiality of blockchains, further research might more widely contribute to debates onthe desirability of technological ‘silver bullets’ as governance solutions to complexenvironmental problems, such as solutions to climate change (Kuehr and Williams,2003; Galaz, 2014).192 M.
Campbell-VerduynEthics and legitimacy of blockchains and global governanceChanges in the earth’s climate, in technology, and in global governance all tendto be considered by scholars and policy-makers alike in technical manners thatbackground the important ethical underpinnings and implications of suchdynamic processes (Brassett and Holmes, 2010).
Against this, and as summarised in this chapter, several contributors to this volume stressed the normativeimplications of forms of blockchain-based governance.
For example, DuPontconcluded how the case of The DAO highlights ‘the challenging ethical terrainof experimentation with forms of distributed action through autonomous, decentralised systems’.
In foregrounding the normative implications of preprogrammed and automated activities, this chapter provided an important avenuefor wider scrutiny of the desirability that applications of emergent technologiesprovide for contemporary global governance.
Yielding potentially significantefficiencies in organisation and management of activities across and withinnational borders, such as in minimising human corruption and error, automatedtechnologies can also involve significant risks and inspire fears of out-of-controldecision-making (e.g.
Harris, 2012).
Yet, as contributors to this volume stressed,neither technologies nor specifc actors are alone in ‘complete control’ or entirely‘out of control’ of contemporary governance.
Rather, technology and socialactors tend to co-constitute one another and evolve in dialectical manners thatare hard to predict, as Campbell-Verduyn and Goguen stressed in their analysisof the specific case of global AML governance.Further research might seek less to provide the most accurate predictions ofhow technologies and global governance are likely to co-evolve than to try toidentify normative implications arising from technological change that are pertinent to the everyday decisions made by a variety of actors underpinning contemporary global governance.
Further dystopian warnings of out-of-controltechnologies and utopian visions of magnificent technology-enabled futures areless required than explicitly normative analysis that, for example, renders visiblethe implications of competing visions of how the world should be governed.
Indoing so, future research on blockchains and other emergent technologies mightproductively integrate and build on existing interrogations of the implicit ideasprogrammed in various automated systems that increasingly underly processesof governance in the global political economy (e.g.
Coeckelbergh and Reijers,2016: 177).
Studies might specificly ask whether alternative applications ofemergent technologies advance less individualistic visions and more collectivesocial goals (e.g.
Scott, 2016; Zeilinger, 2016).
Whether existing blockchainapplications can harness individual autonomy to herald more communal activities and processes should be investigated further, as Rodima-Taylor and Grimescall for in this volume.
Do applications of blockchains such as ‘e-residency’identity documents (re)constitute actors as citizens or merely consumers (e.g.Sullivan and Burger, 2017)? Might governance by bockchains give rise to lessmarket-based outcomes when actors beyond a privileged male technocratic eliteare involved in the coding and technical designs?Conclusion 193These questions and calls for further research also point to the need to furtherconsider the legitimacy of emergent technologies and contemporary global governance.
Both the effectiveness of outputs and representativeness of inputs inblockchain-based organisations and decision-making processes might be furtherscrutinised in ongoing studies of this emergent technology (Scharpf, 1999).
Whoprecisely is involved in programming blockchains, as well as in using blockchains and in implementing formal and informal governance of blockchainsmight be explicitly linked to the input legitimacy of emergent technologies.Meanwhile, whether or not applications of blockchains help in addressing longstanding ‘blockages’ in global governance, or simply reinforce existing problemsand give rise to new pathologies, might be related to their output legitimacy.
Thenovel forms of remittance detailed by Rodima-Taylor and Grimes, as well as themore controversial blockchain-based derivatives that legal scholars have investigated (Shadab, 2014), may pose profoundly different implications for the legitimacy of blockchains.
Explicit attention to issues of ethics and legitimacy mayprovide further insights into the governance dynamics underlying other noveltechnologies with autonomous features, from the Internet-of-Things (IoT) toself-driving cars and forms of artificial intelligence, whose emerging presence inthe global political economy and overlaps with blockchains tend to be considered in largely technical and apolitical manners (Atzori, 2017a; Christidis andDevetsikiotis, 2016; Omohundro, 2014; Swan, 2015b).ConclusionThis book sought to shift beyond largely sensationalistic, economistic, legalistic,and technical existing debates on blockchain applications to Bitcoin and beyondtowards more nuanced appreciations of the wider implications posed by theseand other emergent technologies for the specific actors and processes underpinning contemporary global governance.
Even a dedicated volume, however,cannot tease out all of these implications.
This book was intended as an initialrather than the sole bridge linking broader social scientific analysis of blockchains with the analytical insights of GPE scholarship into issues of authority,power, and governance.
This merely provisional final chapter has tied theinsights of contributors to this volume together in clarifying interlinked forms ofgovernance by, with, and of emergent technologies, as well as in proposing directions that future research might productively take for generating furtherinsights into the contemporary governance of global political economy.
GPEscholars and scholars from the wider social sciences and humanities alike areinvited to take up these suggested research avenues in further exploring governance in a period that may or may not be labelled by future historians as the‘block age’, but surely will be identified as one characterised by novel experimentations with emergent technologies.194 M.
Campbell-VerduynAcknowledgementsThe support of the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada(fellowship no.
756-2015-0474) as well as the editors at Routledge and the RIPEGlobal Political Economy Series, especially Eleni Tsingou, is gratefullyacknowledged.Notes1 Entailing efforts to demonstrate the feasibility and practical application of what remainsa concept or prototype.2 Such as www.acq.osd.mil/chieftechnologist/publications/docs/TRA2011.pdf.
See alsothe Schumpeterian waves or Konkratieff cycles that have been criticised for overemphasising the self-driving momentum of technologies (Fritsch, 2014).3 For real-time statistics see http://digiconomist.net/beciBibliographyAdam, B.
(2004).
Time.
Cambridge: Polity.Aitken, R.
(2016, 2 November).
Switzerland eyes Europe’s fintech crown with lowerregulation.
Financial Times.Aoyama, Y., and Parthasarathy, B.
(2016).
The rise of the hybrid domain: Collaborativegovernance for social innovation.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.Atzori, M.
(2017a).
Blockchain-based architectures for the internet of things: A survey.Available at SSRN: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2846810Atzori, M.
(2017b).
Blockchain technology and decentralized governance: Is the state stillnecessary? Journal of Governance and Regulation, 6(1): 45–62.Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
(n.d.).
Regulatory sandbox.
Retrieved26 August 2017 from http://asic.gov.au/for-business/your-business/innovation-hub/regulatory-sandbox/Baker, A.
(2010).
Restraining regulatory capture? Anglo-America, crisis politics and trajectories of change in global financial governance.
International Affairs, 86(3): 647–63.Bank of Thailand.
(2016).
Regulatory sandbox.
Retrieved 26 August 2017 from www.bot.or.th/Thai/FIPCS/Documents/FPG/2559/ThaiPDF/25590251.pdfthaiBank Negara Malaysia.
(2016, 18 October).
Financial technology regulatory sandboxframework.
Retrieved 26 August 2017 from www.bnm.gov.my/index.php?ch=en_announcement&pg=en_announcement&ac=467&lang=en.Best, J.
(2014).
The return of the public in global governance.
Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Brassett, J., and Holmes, C.
(2010).
International political economy and the question ofethics.
Review of International Political Economy, 17(3): 425–53.Campbell-Verduyn, M.
(2017).
Capturing the moment? Crisis, market accountability, andthe limits of legitimation.
New Political Science, 39(3).Campbell-Verduyn, M.
(2013).
Between continuity and upheaval: Hybridised global financial policy in the post-crisis period.
Paterson Review of International Affairs, 13:33–68.Carney, M.
(2013, 16 December).
Bitcoin has a dark side: Its carbon footprint.
Pando.Carpenter, D., and Moss, D.A.
(eds) (2013).
Preventing regulatory capture: Specialinterest influence and how to limit it.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Conclusion 195Cerny, P.
(1994).
The infrastructure of the infrastructure? Toward “embedded financialorthodoxy” in the international political economy.
In R.P.
Palan, and B.
Gills (eds)Transcending the state-global divide: A neostructuralist agenda in international relations (pp.
223–49).
Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner.Christidis, K., and Devetsikiotis, M.
(2016).
Blockchains and smart contracts for theinternet of things.
IEEE Access, 4: 2292–2303.Coeckelbergh, M., and Reijers, W.
(2016).
Cryptocurrencies as narrative technologies.ACM SIGCAS Computers and Society, 45(3): 172–8.Der Derian, J.
(2003).
The question of information technology in international relations.Millennium, 32(3): 441–56.DuPont, Q., and Maurer, B.
(2015, 23 June).
Ledgers and law in the blockchain.
King’sReview.Edwards, P.
(2003).
Infrastructure and modernity: Force, time, and social organization.
InT.J.
Misa, P.
Brey, and A.
Feenberg (eds) The history of sociotechnical systems: Modernity and technology (pp.
185–226).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Einsiedel, E.
(2009).
Making sense of emerging technologies.
In E.
Einsiedel (ed.)Emerging technologies: From hindsight to foresight.
Vancouver: UBC Press.Financial Conduct Authority.
(2015, November).
Regulatory sandbox.
London: Author.Freifeld, K.
(2015, 28 July).
Former NY financial watchdog counters criticism on bitcoinwork.
Reuters.Fritsch, S.
(2014).
Conceptualizing the ambivalent role of technology in internationalrelations: Between systemic change and continuity.
In M.
Mayer, M.
Carpes, and R.Knoblich (eds) The global politics of science and technology, Vol.
1 (pp.
115–39).Berlin: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.Galaz, V.
(2014).
Global environmental governance, technology and politics: TheAnthropocene gap.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.Gartner.
(2016, 16 August).
Gartner’s 2016 hype cycle for emerging technologies identifies three key trends that organizations must track to gain competitive advantage.Retrieved 26 August 2017 from www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3412017Gimein, M.
(2013, 12 April).
Virtual bitcoin mining is a real-world environmental disaster.
Bloomberg.Harris, R.
(2012).
The fear index.
New York: Random House.Hayes, A.
(2015).
A cost of production model for Bitcoin.
New School for SocialResearch, working paper 05/2015.Hesse-Biber, S.
(ed.) (2011).
The handbook of emergent technologies in social research.Oxford: Oxford University PressHolley, E.
(2015, 28 October).
Linq launches blockchain platform Linq at Money 2020 inLas Vegas.
Banking Technology.Hong Kong Monetary Authority.
(2016, 6 September).
Fintech supervisory sandbox.Retrieved 26 August 2017 from www.hkma.gov.hk/media/eng/doc/key-information/guidelines-and-circular/2016/20160906e1.pdfHurt, S., and Lipschutz, R.
(eds) (2015).
Hybrid rule and state formation: Public-privatepower in the 21st century.
New York: Routledge.Jasanoff, S.
(2004).
The idiom of co-production.
In S.
Jasanoff (ed.) States of knowledge:The co-production of science and the social order.
London: Routledge.Jeffs, J.
(2008).
The politics of financial plumbing: Harmonization and interests in theconstruction of the international payment system.
Review of International PoliticalEconomy, 15(2): 259–88.196 M.
Campbell-VerduynKaminska, I.
(2016, 17 March).
More decentralized autonomous organisation (DAO)mysticism.
Financial Times.Karlstrøm, H.
(2014).
Do libertarians dream of electric coins? The material embeddedness of Bitcoin.
Distinktion: Scandinavian Journal of Social Theory, 15(1): 23–36.Knieff, B.
(2015).
Blockchain: What is it good for? Absolutely something.
Aite Group.KPMG.
(2017).
The pulse of fintech Q4 2016.
Retrieved 26 August 2017 from https://assets.kpmg.com/content/dam/kpmg/xx/pdf/2017/02/pulse-of-fintech-q4-2016.pdfKrugman, P.
(2013, 28 December).
Bitcoin is evil.
New York Times.Kuehr, R., and Williams, E.
(2003).
Computers and the environment: Understanding andmanaging their impacts.
Vol.
14.
Berlin: Springer Science and Business Media.Langley, P., and Leyshon, A.
(2016).
Platform capitalism: The intermediation and capitalisation of digital economic circulation.
Finance and Society, early view.Leander, A.
(2015).
Theorising international monetary relations: Three questions aboutthe significance of materiality.
Contexto Internacional, 37(3): 945–73.MacKenzie, D.
(2005).
Opening the black boxes of global finance.
Review of International Political Economy, 12(4): 555–76.Malmo, C.
(2017, 7 March).
A single Bitcoin transaction takes thousands of times moreenergy than a credit card swipe.
Vice Motherboard.Malmo, C.
(2015, 29 June).
Bitcoin is unsustainable.
Vice Motherboard.Maupin, J.
(2017).
Blockchains and the G20: Building an inclusive, transparent andaccountable digital economy.
Centre for International Governance Innovation, PolicyBrief 101.Maurer, B., and Swartz, L.
(2017).
Paid: Tales of dongles, checks, and other money stuff.Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Maurer, B., Nelms, T.C., and Swartz, L.
(2013) ‘When perhaps the real problem is moneyitself!’: The practical materiality of Bitcoin.
Social Semiotics, 23(2), 261–77.Mayer, M., Carpes, M., and Knoblich, R.
(2014).
The global politics of science andtechnology: An introduction.
In M.
Mayer, M.
Carpes, and R.
Knoblich (eds) Theglobal politics of science and technology Vol.
1 (pp.
1–38).
Berlin: Springer BerlinHeidelberg.McCook, H.
(2014).
An order-of-magnitude estimate of the relative sustainability of theBitcoin network.
Retrieved 26 August 2017 from www.scribd.com/doc/228253109/The-Relative-Sustainability-of-the-Bitcoin-Network-by-Hass-McCookMusiani, F., Cogburn, D.L., DeNardis, L., and Levinson, N.S.
(eds) (2016).
The turn toinfrastructure in Internet governance.
New York: Springer.Narayanan, A., Bonneau, J., Felten, E., Miller, A., and Goldfeder, S.
(2016).
Bitcoin andcryptocurrency technologies: A comprehensive introduction.
Princeton, NJ: PrincetonUniversity Press.Novak, W.J.
(2013).
A revisionist history of regulatory capture.
Preventing RegulatoryCapture: Special Interest Influence and How to Limit It, pp.
25–49.O’Dwyer, K., and Malone, D.
(2014).
Bitcoin mining and its energy footprint.
25th IETIrish Signals and Systems Conference, pp.
280–5.Omohundro, S.
(2014).
Cryptocurrencies, smart contracts, and artificial intelligence.
AIMatters, 1(2): 19–21.Overdevest, C., and Zeitlin, J.
(2014).
Assembling an experimentalist regime: Transnational governance interactions in the forest sector.
Regulation and Governance, 8(1),22–48.Pagliari, S.
(2012).
Making good financial regulation: Towards a policy response to regulatory capture.
London: Grosvenor House Publishing.Conclusion 197Porter, T.
(2014).
Constitutive public practices in a world of changing boundaries.
In J.Best, and A.
Gheciu (eds) The return of the public in global governance, pp.
223–42.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Rotolo, D., Hicks, D., and Martin, B.
(2015).
What is an emerging technology? ResearchPolicy, 44(10): 1827–43Sabel, C., and Zeitlin, J.
(2008).
Learning from difference: The new architecture of experimentalist governance in the EU.
European Law Journal, 14(3): 271–327.Scharpf, F.W.
(1999).
Governing in Europe: Effective and democratic? Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.Schwab, K.
(2016).
The fourth industrial revolution.
Geneva: World Economic Forum.Scott, B.
(2016).
Blockchain technology for reputation scoring of financial actors.
Ethicsin Finance, Robin Cosgrove Prize Global edition 2014–2015: 128–39.Shadab, H.
(2014, 9 October).
Regulating Bitcoin and block chain derivatives.
Writtenstatement to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission Global Markets AdvisoryCommittee Digital Currency Introduction – Bitcoin.Sharp, A.
(2017, 23 February).
Canada’s securities regulators launch fintech ‘sandbox’program.
Globe and Mail.Sheller, M., and Urry, J.
(2003).
Mobile transformations of public and private life.Theory, Culture and Society, 20(3): 107–25.Skolnikoff, E.
(1993).
The elusive transformation: Science, technology, and the evolutionof international politics.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.Slaughter, A.M.
(2004).
Sovereignty and power in a networked world order.
StanfordJournal of International Law, 40: 283.Star, S.L.
(1999).
The ethnography of infrastructure.
American Behavioural Scientist,43(3): 377–91.Sullivan, C., and Burger, E.
(2017).
E-residency and blockchain.
Computer Law andSecurity Review, early view.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2017.03.016Swan, M.
(2015a).
Blockchain: Blueprint for a new economy.
Farnham: O’Reilly Media.Swan, M.
(2015b).
Connected car: Quantified self becomes quantified car.
Journal ofSensor and Actuator Networks, 4(1): 2–29.The Economist.
(2015, 31 October).
Blockchains: The great chain of being sure aboutthings.Vigna, P., and Casey, M.J.
(2015).
The age of cryptocurrency: How bitcoin and digitalmoney are challenging the global economic order.
London: St.
Martin’s Press.Walters, R.
(2016, 11 February).
Bitcoin’s future threatened by software schism.
Financial Times.Zeilinger, M.
(2016).
Digital art as ‘monetized graphics’: Enforcing intellectual propertyon the blockchain.
Philosophy and Technology: 1–27.Indexaccountability 10, 54, 79, 93, 95, 112, 182;see also responsibilityaccountants 10accounting: field 90; firms 11, 90; manuals129; systems 27activism 31, 145activists 14, 25, 30, 40, 92; see alsocypherpunksActor–Network Theory 133advertising 40, 44Africa 108; East 15, 111, 114–15, 127,184; sub-Saharan 123; west 124agency 4–5, 14, 50, 52, 109, 112, 114, 118,126, 136, 150, 183; theory 50, 52Aglietta, Michel 27Air Baltic 44AirBnB 2, 161Albert, Felix 157Alderney 78Alexa 58, 60algorithm 1, 30, 74, 137; Proof-of-Stake172; Proof-of-Work 172; as rule 159;Scrypt hashing 57; SHA256, 99; trust in166; see also authorityAlipay 40altcoins 11, 60; see also cryptocurrencies;electronic moneyAmazon 40, 145anarchism 93, 104; crypto-anarchism 34,40, 169; see also societyanarchists 93Andresen, Gavin 139animals 162anonymity 33, 36–7, 43, 92, 121, 145,148–9, 187; quasi or pseudo-anonymity1, 4, 14, 74–7, 80–1, 83, 90, 95–6, 137,187anonymization 83, 148anonymizers 32, 80Apple 30, 89Application Specific Integrated Circuit 99artificial intelligence 193Asia 108, 120; south-east 122assemblage: approach 15, 112; digitalfinance 126; global 112; of humans androbots 159; see also emergenttechnology; knowledgeAtlas.ti 167auditing 10; annual 78; ‘audit trail’ 73Australia 12, 146, 189authority: algorithmic 157, 168–70, 182,187; centralized 3, 50, 57, 64, 93, 95,98, 133, 147; creation 150; decentralizedand distributed 10, 50, 135; distribution151; external 49, 93–5; formal public 8,98–9, 150, 152; individual 150; internal49; juridical 169, 173, 187; legal 168–9,173; levels of 12; maintenance 150;nodes 141; political 27, 39, 42; shifting10; sovereign 27Bagley, Judd 36Baidu 35, 43Bangladesh 12, 79bank: accounts 160; bailouts 2, 92;circumvented 10, 52, 74; asclearinghouses 93; commercial or retail29, 48, 120, 127; consortium 37 (seealso R3); Cypriot 2; de-risking 110, 120,127; employees 73; empowered byblockchains 184; integratingblockchains 11; investment banks 2;remittances 124; role in anti-moneylaundering 72–3; runs on 93; technicalglitches 2; trusted third parties 72; useof mobile money 114; see also centralbanksBank of England 29Index 199Bank of International Settlements 75banking: free 34, 40; systems 25Beijing 102BerkeleyDB 139Best, Jacqueline 40Betamax 179big data 172Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 129Bing 58, 60Bitcoin advocates 34Bitcoin benefits 33, 37Bitcoin challenges, risks, weaknesses 2, 5,89, 102, 144, 166Bitcoin civil war 54, 179Bitcoin co-optation 25, 36Bitcoin Core 60Bitcoin death and demise 25, 141Bitcoin definition: as curiosity 37; asdisruptive 31, 35; as evil 182; asexperimental 30, 35; as foreignconspiracy 99–100; as gold standard 34;as illegitimate 25, 37; as Internet drugmoney 37; as legitimate innovation 38;as many things at once 137; materiality42, 136, 142, 188, 190; as mode ofgovernance 30; as most prominentblockchain 13; as niche 93; as paymentnetwork 34–6; as rewards 8; asspeculative asset 34, 42, 101; asstateless money 31; as trendy 35; astrustless 30; as unsustainable 191; as‘wild west’ 2Bitcoin ecosystem 32–3, 124, 137, 140,142, 144Bitcoin evolution and history 2, 13, 25,133–4, 151; white paper 92Bitcoin exchange trading fund 39Bitcoin Fog 80Bitcoin Foundation 37, 147, 153, 183Bitcoin Improvement Proposals 53, 56Bitcoin Vietnam 122Bitcoin XT 134, 137, 150bitcoind 139–40Bitcointalk 148BitFinex 78BitLaundry 80BitPesa 123–4Bitstamp 78, 95, 145Black Market Reloaded 96blacklisting 73blockchain 2.0 applications 7; benefits 2,5, 12, 14, 48, 96, 182, 190; ascomparable to Internet 104; computercode 181; consideration in GPE 5;decentralized 7, 74, 90, 142; derivatives193; designer 6; as digital databases 1;disintermediation 10, 89; as emergenttechnologies 179–81; experimental 13,159, 173, 185; fit with laws andregulations 4, 12, 96, 100; genesis block104; globe-spanning 12; immutability 1,4, 110; insurance 90, 180; integration inglobal political economy 3 (in foodsupply chains 2; in government 3, 187);as ledgers 1, 2, 110; miners 49, 51, 56,53–4, 142, 173; mining pools 32;normative implications 8–9; peer-topeer 90; permissioned 56 (see alsodistributed ledger technology);permissionless 7–8; proof of concept180; proponents 168; protocol 150;quasi or pseudo-anonymity 4, 74, 121;registries 180; research on 8, 9, 12, 16,69, 165–6, 183; synchronization 139;technical blueprint 1; time-stamping 1,110, 179; trust 110, 119; underlyingproperties 8, 181, 185blockchain.info 145blockstream 60BlockTrail 80Bolivia 12, 79, 98Brainard, Lael 37Bretton Woods 26Brixton Pound 32BTC China 145BTCGuild 140–1business ethicists 11Buterin, Vitalik 139, 141, 158–9, 164,170–1Byrne, Patrick 36California 97; ideology 31capital flight 185; outflows 98, 100capitalism 9: platform 191Cartelier, Jean 30censorship 35, 165; China 35; resistance162central banks 29, 31, 92, 95, 103; attentionto cryptocurrency and blockchain 42,48, 65; quantitative easing programmes2; understanding of money 181CEX.IO 78Chaincode Labs 60charity 162, 183Chiemgauer 32China 15, 43, 79, 89, 91, 99–105, 123,185, 189, 191; approach to technology91; China Banking Regulatory200 IndexChina continuedCommission 100; China InsuranceRegulatory Commission 100; ChinaSecurities Regulatory Commission 100;largest Bitcoin market 92, 99; Ministryof Industry and Information Technology100; People’s Bank of China 12, 99–102Circle 121, 145citizens 25, 35climate change 191Coinalytics 80Coinbase 83, 121, 145Coindesk 153CoinGecko.com 57–8, 60–1CoinJoin 83coinmap.org 44coinmarketcap.com 57coins.ph 122Commodity Futures Trading Commission12Commonwealth 189community: Bitcoin 32, 36–7, 64, 90, 92,166, 175; blockchain 166, 175;Cryptocommunity 2, 13, 31 (as esoteric3; open-source 142); cryptocurrency49–55, 57–8, 61–2, 166; digital 55, 168;investor 161; see also governancecompetition 7, 97, 116; between states 88:management 147; market 30; relationsof 69competitive advantage 184computer: code 3, 65, 158 (as law 8, 119,165, 168–9, 175; glitches 161–4, 182;inflexible 185; neutrality 190);processors 179; scientists 4, 12, 80, 148;servers 148; software 2conflicts of interest 161consultants 3, 7consumer 52, 112, 114–15, 126, 149, 183,192: -citizens 9; critical mass 31;demand 52; loyalty 39; protection 114,116content analysis 167contracts: crypto-contracts 119, 126;language 10; obligations 2; ‘smart’ 10,15, 126, 157, 161, 180; social 119; seealso Ethereumcontroversy: socio-technical 133–5cooperation 4, 11, 120, 147; between firms11; between individuals 93; new formsof 119; paradox 117; see also consensuscorruption 11, 133, 192credit 79, 111, 114–5: circulation 111;cooperatives 113; endorsement 93;institutions 79 (see also banks, financialservices firms); negotiation 117; networks116; social 111–17; see also moneycredit card: companies 124; statements 145crime see illicitcriminal background check 79crisis 15–16, 93, 136, 142, 168; Cyprus 34;existential 170; financial 93; mediation172; refugee 109; see also instabilitycrowdfunding 10, 159–62; see also TheDAOcryptocurrency: and illegal activity 75;central bank-backed 39; centralization13; competition 65; consensus 51, 152;as currencies 4 (see also money);decentralization 13, 52, 64, 89; demand59; funding 64; investors 158; legitimacyand respectability 161–2; loss or theft of11, 38, 94, 164; miners 51, 53, 55–6,60–1, 90–1, 133, 138, 141, 157, 166;mining 51, 61 (farms 191; pools 140–1,183); as monetary-like ‘coins’ 2; opensource 2, 50, 55; as organizations 48;peer-to-peer 52; production and ‘mining’49; proof-of-work 53, 56, 172; proof-ofstake 53, 172; price 2, 49, 94–5, 101,103, 105, 142, 161; public attention to 2,35, 138; as radically different money 13;research 165–6; software code 51; statesponsored 11; as ‘super tax havens’ 10;supply 49, 59; wallets 95crypto-economy 183cryptography 34, 74, 92, 179; forums 55;mailing list 2currency: brokers 123; digital or virtual 39,77, 79, 100, 134, 138; fiat 26, 76, 93;local 32, 180; regional 39; state-backed10, 29, 80, 95; transfer reports 73Curry, Fred 74cyber: attacks 148; security 116; space 48,51; see also Internetcypherpunk 1, 31, 92–3, 103; culture 167;ideologies 161; see also cryptographyDAOhub 157–8, 163Darkcoin 80; see also DashDarkweb 55, 145, 184; see also marketsDash 80; see also DarkcoinDe Filippi, Primavera 137, 150debt: default 29; local meanings 117, 180;as money 26decentralized autonomous organization 10,15, 157–60, 162, 165, 169–73; see alsoThe DAOIndex 201decision-making 4, 14, 28, 31, 48, 51–6,57, 59–60, 65, 135, 141, 151, 160, 182,186, 192–3: everyday 192; see alsopowerDell 36democracy 162, 182Democratic Republic of Congo 123DeNardis, Laura 10denial-of-service (DoS) 143, 148deodand 162developers: Bitcoin 2, 31, 36, 56, 89–91,134, 138–42, 144, 183, 183; blockchain2, 49, 53, 142, 150, 158; cryptocurrency51, 53–5, 59, 61–2; software 128;technology 10, 151development 15, 113; agencies 183diaspora 124dictators: benevolent 142, 149Digicash 31digital: age 4; broadcasting 2; casino 33;community 55, 168, 42 (see alsocurrency, open-source); consensus 1;ecosystem 121; elite 112; encryption 1,90, 148; exchange 3; footprint 112; gaps4; global political economy 1, 16, 183,188; interconnections between states178; marketplaces 2; metallism 8, 136;payment systems 180; privacy 1, 92,114; rails 108; rights 32; sequences ofnumbers 1; technologies 74; (see alsotechnology); traces 148; thermometer159; transactions 1, 77; verification 2,74; see also identificationDigital Asset Transfer Authority 78–9, 183disciplines: academic 4discontent 4discourse 111, 120, 136, 146, 151, 158–9,165, 167–9, 173; performative 167, 175disempowerment 10, 178, 183disorder 15dispute resolution and settlement 147, 149Distributed Ledger Technologies (DLTs) 7Dodd, Nigel 27Donahoe, John 25Dread Pirate Roberts 149Dream Market 83drugs 145–6; ‘war on’ 73Dwolla 143eBay 2, 35, 145economic growth 88economists 4, 12economy see global economy illicitEcuador 12, 79, 98efficiency 36, 52, 100, 110–11, 113, 127,139, 157–8, 182Electronic Frontier Foundation 32elites 34, 184, 192empowerment 5, 9–11, 30, 34, 42, 52, 89,117, 178, 183–5; see alsodisempowerment; powerenvironment: natural 191Equity Bank 116, 127Ethereum 15, 157–60, 162–7, 18 (see alsosmart contracts); Ethereum Classic 165,172; Ethereum Foundation 159, 164–5,170–1ethics 4, 173, 188, 192–3; see alsogovernance; technologyEurope 31: east 91European Banking Authority 79European Central Bank 39, 79European Commission 83European Court of Justice 39European Union 12, 70Europol 76, 80, 83Eurozone 2exchange: economic 137; see also digitalexchangeexchanges: cryptocurrency-to-fiat-currency2, 32–3, 38, 76, 95, 99, 102–3, 124, 140,187; see also Mt.
GoxExpedia 36expertise 166; see also knowledgeFacebook 49, 57Factiva 58fairness 182financial: assets 112; inclusion 15, 79, 108,111–12, 114, 122–5; indicators 50;formal sector 108; mismanagement 162;norms 125; penalties 143; platforms 126;practices 39, 112, 117, 143 (payments110); privacy 79; regulators 37;responsibility 162; returns 173; security116; services firms 12, 97; system 97–8;technology ‘fintech’ 65, 111, 113Financial Action Task Force 14, 69, 128,185; history 73; on blockchains 76–82Financial Stability Board 128Financial Times 3, 58; see also mediaFinney, Hal 31fork: Bitcoin 134, 137–42, 182(involuntary 138–42, 150–2);blockchain 61; cryptocurrency 61–2forums 143–5, 151–2; (see alsoBitcointalk); cryptocurrency 55, 57, 60;cryptography 55; Internet 53, 55, 143202 Indexfraud 119Friedman, Milton 9game theory 163; models 171–2games 28gamification 9Ganssmann, Heiner 28Gatecoin 78Gauss, Martin 44Gilpin, Robert 96github.com 53, 57global economy: level of analysis 48;legitimate upperworlds versus dark,illegitimate underworlds 76, 78–82, 110,138, 147global finance 11, 70, 111: automated andhigh-frequency 172; growing role oftechnology 111; see also financeglobal financial crisis 2, 134; of 2008 25,30–1, 92, 133global governance: anti-money laundering14–15, 96, 123–5, 147, 180, 182–3, 187;co-evolution with technology 69–70;disaggregation 112; centralization 12–3;changing nature 5 (see also agency,legitimacy, power); global taxgovernance 10; legitimacy 193; nonstate actors 13, 43, 69, 73, 91, 112;problems 182global monetary system 25Global North 89, 92, 94, 185Global Political Economy: scholars of 4Global South 15, 89, 92, 94, 114, 127, 182gold bugs 34Google 35, 40; Glass 179governance: algorithmic 163, 171–2; bytechnology 7–9, 15–16, 136, 142, 149,169, 171; centralized 170; coercive 12,18, 77, 93, 98–9; common goals 185;community or external 49, 54–6, 182;compliance 143, 147 (see alsoregulatory); continuum of 169–70;corporate 10, 48, 50; effectiveness 7,12, 48, 52, 193; ethics 192; gaps 13;good governance 170; hybrid 65, 117,188–90; infrastructure 142, 191;internal 49, 53–4; Internet 10, 135–6;laissez-faire 15, 89, 185; liberal 91,97, 172, 182; long-term mechanisms168; market-based 9, 187; modes of119; monetary 4; networked 27; oftechnology 12–14, 16, 89 (see alsoformal regulation); opaque 162 (seealso transparency); options 159;plurality of understandings 126;practical 171; provisional 7, 12, 40;relations 169; role of humans 51; selfgovernance 14, 137, 170; technocratic4, 192; through technology 7, 169;visions 158; with technology 8, 16,169governments: revolving door with business190; role in technological development103; see also nation-statesgrounded theory 166Group of Twenty (G20) 111: FinancialInclusion Action Plan 114; GlobalPartnership for Financial Inclusion 114Groupon 40Guevara, Che 146hackers 1, 92, 95, 148; see alsocypherpunkhacking services 145Hallam, George 164Hashcash 31Hayek, Friedrich 10heterodox economics 25hierarchy 141, 150: micro- 151HitBTChoarding 8, 32Hong Kong 78, 97, 189hype: media 49; peak hype 3Iceland: Foreign Exchange Act 79identification: of customers 76, 78–9, 125;of cryptocurrency users 78; ofsuspicious transactions 74, 80identity 1, 70; documents 11, 78, 116, 192(fake passports 145); legal 162;obfuscating 78; tracking 80ideology 8: liberal 172; see alsoliberatarianillicit: activities 72; goods and services 2;markets 3 (see also Bitcoin; Silk Road;shadow economy); trafficking 146individualism 9Indonesia 79inequalities 4; see also digital gapsinflation 30information 27: asymmetries 65, 143, 182;collection 97; flow 146; society 89infrastructures: access 114; communicative118, 127; human 111; informationtechnology 36; financial 108, 110(payments 108, 110–11); material 111,137; money delivery 124; studies 135–6;technical 15; see also InternetIndex 203Ingham, Geoffrey 26Initial coin offerings (ICOs) 160innovation 111, 115: benefits 89, 189;ecosystem 126; fourth industrialrevolution 6; local meaning 180; policyscholars 6, 188; see also emergenttechnologyinstability: financial 2, 13; global financialcrisis; see also crisisInstitute of International Finance 13insurance 10, 72, 90, 116, 149, 180: microinsurance 113; mutual 116; numbers 77;providers (insurers) 10, 113interest rates 11intermediaries 3; financial intermediaries10; see also disintermediationInternational Association of DepositInsurers 128International Association of InsuranceSupervisors 128International Finance Corporation 129International Monetary Fund 43International Organization of SecuritiesCommissions 128international organizations 184International Relations 5, 70; regimetheory 70–1Internet 1, 3, 4, 12, 134–6; access 1, 34architecture of 8; benefits 104;coordination challenges 171; culture167; exchange points 136; expansion88; forums 53, 55, 143 (see alsoReddit); governance 10; infrastructure 7,134, 51, 90; in International Relations 5;Internet-of-Finance 13, 100; Internet-ofMoney 4; Internet-of-Things 6, 193;Internet Protocol address 77; InternetRelay Chat (IRC) 140–1; problems 104;search 77; service providers 136 (seealso Alexa, Bing, Google); shuttingdown 185; surveillance 136interoperability 115Interpol 76, 80investors 65, 118, 158, 167, 185: amateur160; community 161Isle of Man 78Israel 146Japan 33, 95, 143Jentzsch, Christopher 157, 160, 163–4journalists 3, 149, 183; as ‘testers’ 151Kaminsky, Dan 95Karlstrøm, Henrik 137Karpelès, Mark 142–3Kenya 113–16, 123, 184: Bank of Kenya115–16, 121, 123; National PaymentsAct 116Kenyan Bankers Association 116Keynes, John Maynard 26Kickstarter 160Kipochi 124know your customer 33, 39, 73, 78,115–16, 121, 123, 125knowledge 6–7, 28, 69–70, 138, 179, 183,188: contingent 126; economy 88;expert 10, 137; industry 190; lack of 37;local 126; novel sets of 6; production127; sharing 77; social 118, 124; seealso expertiseKraken 145large technical systems 5Latin America 94law 8, 79: enforcement 82; human 162;medieval 170; see also Lex mercatoria;regulatory sandboxlawyers 10Lee, Charles 57Lee, Teik Ming 57legal: ambiguity 97; assistance 77;conditions 110; counsel 162; grey area96; loopholes 143, 165; profession 90;scholars 5, 7, 12, 75, 193; space 34, 187;status 162; thin ice 160legitimacy 4; see also authority;technologylender of last resort 29–30, 95LevelDB 139lex mercatoria 170liability: legal 169; limited 3, 95; unlimited95libertarian: discourse 146; philosophy 145,150Linux 7Litecoin 56–7LocalBitcoins.com 147Loveluck, Benjamin 137, 150LSD 145M-Pesa 15, 115–17, 128McCaleb, Jed 43, 142Macmillan, Auryn 157Macurak, Andrew 74Magic 43Magna Carta 3MakerDAO 163, 174Malaysia 189204 Indexmarket: black or dark markets 95–7;capitalization 52; digital 145; emerging108; forces 34; free 145 (see alsolibertarian); interruption 143; perfect146; size 103; value 52, 173Maxim, Mike 36media 2, 52; as agent of governance 49; asmarket actors 149; online 143; publicity55; sensationalistic 49, 75 (see alsohype); social 14, 187 (see alsoFacebook, Twitter); traditional 14, 49,60Microsoft 89migration: forced 110MIT Media Lab 60Mobotiq 161money: as a process 27; as a commodity28, 135; counterfeiting 48; credit 119;different forms 118; double-spending138, 140; electronic, e-cash or e-money4, 93, 113–14, 126, 143–4, 147 (see alsocryptocurrency, digital money, virtualcurrency); fiduciary 26; functionalistunderstanding 25; game 25, 27;hierarchy of 27; laundering 11, 15, 38,72, 147 (see also global governance,regimes); materiality 26, 190; mobile108, 111, 113–14; paper money 11, 26,42; public and private 29; social 120;special purpose 39; stateless 31;transfers 108; (see also remittances);transmitters 97, 143; trust 26–7, 119;value 26–7, 29MoneyGram 123monitoring 12, 55–6, 76, 78–9, 99; seealso surveillancemoral: space 39, 187; wrong 165Mt.
Gox 2, 32–3, 36, 95, 134, 138, 142–5,161multinational firms 2, 11, 181; blockchainfirms 11; cooperating 11; integratingblockchains 2; shell companies 143;stakeholders 48murder 145, 150Mutum Sigillum 143Nakamoto, Satoshi 1, 31–2, 92, 151, 153,179, 180; as unidentified 6, 92narcotics 33narratives 28, 88nation-states 11; developing 113; role intechnological change 11national borders 1, 3, 83, 89, 96, 109, 143,192New York state 78, 80, 97, 105: Bitlicense78, 80, 185, 190; Superintendent ofFinancial Services 190network: communicative 109, 113, 118;computer 30, 158; consensus 138–40;credit 116; decentralized 74; distributed51, 61; effects 122; financial 98, 115,126; global 74–5, 95–6, 104, 112, 134;governmental 112; informal 125;infrastructure 113, 126; monetary 27,114; nodes 53–4; participation 54, 59;payment 30, 32, 34–7, 40–1, 180; peerto-peer 93–4, 145; proof-of-work 166;reciprocity 127; security 59; social116–17, 137; telephone 97; transaction92, 103; transportation 116; user 1; seealso digital; Bitcoin; blockchainNigeria 123non-profit see Bitcoin Foundation; Bill andMelinda Gates Foundation; Stellarnon-state actors 9, 13, 73norms 8, 70, 135–6, 140November 2015 Paris terrorist attacks 75,83OkCupid 36OKPay 140oligarchy 141, 165, 183Ong, Bobby 57Ontario 189operating systems 7oppression: perceived 34organization: level of analysis 48Organization for Economic Co-operationand Development 88Organization for Security and Cooperationin Europe 76Overstock.com 35–6owners 50, 53Panama 185payment 109: aggregators 124; providers128; rail 52, 109, 113, 116; services 140PayPal 32, 35, 72Peercoin 56–7philanthropists 183Philippines 121–2, 124: Anti-MoneyLaundering Council Secretariat 121;Central Bank of the Philippines 121police 76, 148, 151; inspectors 148;intergovernmental 76, 80, 83 (see alsoEuropol and Interpol); investigations138, 146–7; national 146; work 148policy: -makers 13, 82, 127, 191;Index 205developmental 111; distrust 146;monetary 31, 39, 43, 48 (see also centralbanks); recommendations 49; responses89, 103–4; scholars 6, 188; see alsoresponsibilitypolitical parties 2power 50: asymmetries 4, 98, 141, 151,183 (see also inequalities); choices 89;coercive 29–30; computational or ‘hashpower’ 99, 140–2; constitutive 8;decentralization 10; dynamics 118;hegemonic 73; individual 146; market119; North–South divide 104 (see alsoGlobal North, Global South); powerover 9, 183; power per node 140;regulatory 39; relations 185; states 89;structure 98professional 118, 180; backgrounds 190;capacity 100; domains 10, 39profit 112, 175: maximization 50;opportunities 82; risky 167profitability 50programmers 49, 118, 186; see also Bitcoin;blockchain; computer; cryptocurrencyprogress 4, 32, 42, 116; see alsotechnological changeprotocol 2, 30; mobile 118; Voice overInternet Protocol 7, 97: see also Bitcoin;blockchainpublic: debate 143; interest 55–6, 60;semi- 167Putin, Vladimir 98R3, 11, 37race: to empty 163; to the bottom 184,189; to the top 184ratings 149rational actor 172, 182rationality 9, 70, 112Rebit.ph 122Reddit 36, 49, 57, 60, 148, 164–7, 171regimes: anti-money laundering 14, 69, 71;conceptions of 70; evolution 69;financial 71registries: of cryptocurrency-to-fiat moneyexchanges 76; of data 11; of health 3; ofland 3regulation: attempt 143; domestic 143regulatory capture 189–90; compliance143; sandboxes 12, 189–90remittance 9, 12, 15, 82, 109, 125, 180;companies 120–1; costs 109–10; cryptoremittance 123–4, 184; digital 108,115–17, 119–20responsibility 95, 144–7; experiment 162;see also financial responsibilityreturn on investment 52rights: and duties 171; consumer 114;intellectual property 88; ownershiprights 2, 49, 50; private property 3, 136Ripple 9, 54, 56–7, 61, 65, 121; Labs 57risk 12, 15, 33, 37–9, 83, 88–9, 92, 96,99–104, 114, 142, 159, 185, 189–90,192; assessments 78–9; attitudes 50;-based approaches 125; behaviour 160;management 78; market 93; profiles 77;-sharing 117; taking 182; theoretical 75;see also banking; technologyRosetta Stone 3Russia 89, 91, 98, 104, 184Sadler, Steven 147, 149Safaricom 115, 124Satoshi Citadel Industries 122SatoshiDice 32–3, 43savings: local meaning thereof 117, 180Science and Technology Studies (STS) 5,133–5, 137, 150, 152security 2, 57, 72, 133, 150, 162:commodification 149; communities 6;devices 136, 152; experts 16, 95; risks95–6, 163: see also cybersecurity;financial securityself-determination 36self-interest 9Senegal 123September 11 terrorist attacks 73shadow economy 42shadow of the state 101, 189shareholder 50, 56 value 50sharing economy 2, 161; see also AirBnbSheep Marketplace 96Shopify 36short selling 165Shrem, Charlie 147Silicon Valley 97Silk Road 32–3, 75, 83, 96, 134, 145–50,152, 161, 184Singapore 189: Suspicious TransactionReporting Office 78Skolnikoff principle 7, 180Skolnikoff, Eugene 6Skype 7Slack 157, 164Slock.it 157, 159, 161, 163–4, 169, 171,174Slush 140Snowden, Edward 89206 Indexsocial determinism 69; embeddedness 171;exchange 159; goods 172; insurancenumbers 77; interaction 157; pre-social159; scientists 4; welfare 88, 190;worlds 157, 168society: anarchical 31; capitalist 28;cashless 38, 42; civil 180; new modelsof 159Society for Worldwide Interbank FinancialTelecommunication 75; SWIFT Institute75software: coders 14; malicious 145; nonproprietary 2; open-source 2, 50, 55 (seealso community); triggering 159;updates and upgrades 140, 163–4; seealso protocolSolarcoin 191South Africa 124, 128sovereignty 112speculation 2, 34; and value 49stability: socio-economic 189; see alsoinstabilitystate of nature 8Stellar 10, 56–7, 59, 61; Foundation 60stock market: back-office operations 3;bubble 4; operators 2Stokes, Robert 74surveillance 2, 11, 81, 89, 92, 136; see alsomonitoringsuspicious activity reports (SARs) 78Sweden 39Switzerland 189Tanzania 114, 123, 128tax 37, 39: avoidance 100; collection 169;evasion 48, 72, 100; havens 10; power29; see also global governancetechno-dystopia 4, 88, 178, 180–1techno-Leviathan 8techno-utopia 4, 15, 30–1, 146, 159, 169,172, 178, 180–1technological change 1, 82; difficulty topredict 7; as ‘disruption’ and increasingcompetition 7, 113; as cycles or waves180, 194; enthusiasm for 99; evolution6; GPE literature on 90; indeterminatetrajectories 14; normative implications 7(see also emergent technology);predetermined trajectories 69, 180; risks15, 97–9; role of nation-states 11, 89,103technological determinism 69technologists 3, 7, 49, 65; see alsodevelopers; programmerstechnology: as black box 181; as appliedknowledge 69; biopolitical 168;co-evolution with global governance69–70; constructivist understanding of 9;as deeply social 8; as emergent 6, 113; asestablished 6; ethics 192; enthusiasts 2;fads 179; funding and research 6; andglobal governance 4, 88, 90; GPE studiesof 4; information communicationtechnology (ICT) 2, 4, 70, 171; Internetbased 3; intertwined in daily life 88;legitimacy 193; materiality 113; proof ofconcept 6; rationalist understanding of 9;regulatory perceptions 187; revolutionary6; risks 97–9, 192; as silver bullet 191;social embeddedness and integration 170;supportive communities 179; tensionbetween transparency and anonymity 74;users 8telephone: telecom companies 97, 114;mobile 108, 115terror: financing 75, 83, 98; war on 73Tett, Gillian 3text message 115Thailand 189The Company 147The DAO 10, 15, 50, 64, 158–75, 179,182, 183, 186; see also decentralizedautonomous organizationsThe DAO of Whales 162, 165The Economist 3, 57; see also mediaThe Netherlands 11TigerDirect 36time 26TOR 145, 148transaction 1; across national borders 88;blocks (see also blockchain);concealment 148 (see also encryption);costs 93, 110; illicit 147–8 (see alsomoney laundering); logs or records 78,138; security 150; suspicious 74, 97;transparent 143; traceability 143 (seealso monitoring); user-verified 1–2; seealso digital transactionstransparency 43, 74, 79, 100, 110, 114,119, 136, 162, 182–3trust 3, 137, 148–9; in Bitcoin in 34, 94,103, 120, 133, 145; in blockchain 110,119; hierarchical 27; impersonal 27;interpersonal 103; methodical 27; inmoney 26–7; systemic 27; systems of119; trust actors 3 (third party 149);vertical 27, 29Tual, Stephen 163–4, 174Index 207Twitter 49, 57, 60Uber 2Uganda 114, 123Ukraine 91, 191Ulbricht, Ross 31, 33, 145–50United Kingdom 12, 123, 189; NationalRisk Assessment 75; rescue of banks 92United Nations 70, 2030 SustainableDevelopment Agenda 111; Office onDrugs and Crime 76; SustainableDevelopment Goals 110United States 12–13, 72, 97–9, 104; BankSecrecy Act 97; constitution 98, 105;Department of Justice 120; Departmentof the Treasury 120; Federal Bureau ofInvestigation (FBI) 83, 145, 147–50, 184;Federal Communications Commission97; Federal Reserve System 37; FinancialCrimes Enforcement Network 37, 97,120; as hegemon 72; law 143; MoneyLaundering Control Act 72; Securitiesand Exchange Commission 39, 120–1;Senate Committee on Homeland Securityand Governmental Affairs 37users: Bitcoin 1, 30, 32–3, 36, 38, 54, 96,133, 138–40, 151–2; blockchain users7–9, 53, 74, 82, 142, 151–2;cryptocurrency 11, 55, 76–8, 80–1Valhalla 83value: Bitcoin 2, 137, 142; cryptocurrency14, 49, 173; money 26–7, 29Velasco, Paul 137Ver, Roger 31VHS 179Vietnam 79, 99, 122: State Bank ofVietnam 12Virgin Galactic 36Vodacom 128volatility: Bitcoin 2, 93–4; see also crisisvoting 49, 53–7, 59–64, 158, 160, 162vulnerability 95, 101, 134Wal-Mart 2Wall Street Journal 57; see also mediawealth 104weapons 146welfare benefits 11Wells, H.G.
1Western Union 123whales 162whistleblowers 10, 82Wikileaks 10, 32Wikipedia 53, 138Winkelvoss twins 39Wired 145, 148Wittgenstein, Ludwig 28Wordpress 36World Bank: Send Money Africa 129World Economic Forum 13Wuille, Pieter 140Zcash 80Zerocoin 80Zug 39
